

[^x1]: Sūrah al-Nahl, 16:44.

[^x2]: al-Bukhārī and Muslim – it will later follow in full.

[^x3]: al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

<!-- TODO Check if the number of Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd is correct -->

[^x4]: Mālik, Abū Dāwūd, Nasāʾī, and Ibn Ḥibbān. A ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth, declared ṣaḥīḥ by several Imāms. I have given its takhrīj in _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_ (#451, #1276).

<!-- TODO Check the numbers for al-Zuhd and Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd-->

[^x5]: Ṣaḥīḥ – collected by Ibn al-Mubārak in _al-Zuhd_ (10/21/1-2), Abū Dāwūd and Nasāʾī with a good sanad; I have given its takhreej in _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_ (#761).

[^x6]: Abū al-Ḥasanāt al-Lucknowī says in _al-Nāfiʿ al-Kabīr liman yutāliʿ al-Jāmiʿ al-Saghīr_ (p. 122-3), after ranking the books of Ḥanafī fiqh and saying which of them are dependable and which are not: “All that we have said about the relative grades of these compilations is related to their content of fiqh issues; however, as for their content with regards to aḥādīth of the Prophet \pbuh, then it does not apply, for many books on which the cream of the fuqahāʾ rely are full of fabricated aḥādīth, let alone rulings of the scholars. It is clear to us from a broad analysis that although their authors were otherwise competent, they were careless in their quotation of narrations.”

		One of these false, fabricated aḥādīth which are found in some of the best books is: “He who offers the compulsory prayers on the last Friday of Ramaḍān, that will make up for every prayer he missed during his life up to the age of seventy years!” Lucknowī says in _al-Āthār al-Marfūʿah fi al-Akhbār al-Mawḍūʿah_ (p. 315), after giving this ḥadīth, “ʿAlī al-Qārī says in his _al-Mawḍūʿāt al-Sughrāh_ and _al-Kubrā_: this is totally false, for it contradicts the ijmāʾ (consensus) that one act of worship cannot make up for those missed over years. Hence, there is no point in quoting the author of _al-Nihāyah_ nor the rest of the commentators on _al-Hidāyah_, for they are not scholars of Ḥadīth, nor did they reference this ḥadīth to any of the collectors of ḥadīth.”

		Imām al-Shawkānī also mentioned this ḥadīth in _al-Fawāʾid al-Majmūʿah fi al-Aḥādīth al-Mawḍūʿah_ with a similar wording and then said (p. 54), “This is fabricated beyond doubt – I do not even find it in any of the compilations of fabricated aḥādīth! However, it has become popular among some students of fiqh in the city of Ṣanʿāʾ in this age of ours, and many of them have started acting according to it. I do not know who has fabricated it for them – May Allāh disgrace the liars.”

		Lucknowī further says, “To establish that this ḥadīth, which is found in books of rituals and formulas, is fabricated, I have composed a brief essay, with intellectual and narrated evidence, called _Repelling the Brethren from the Inventions of the Last Friday of Ramaḍān_, in which I have filed points which will enlighten minds and to which ears will hearken, so consult it, for it is valuable in this topic and of high quality.”

		The occurrence of similar false aḥādīth in the books of fiqh destroys the reliability of other aḥādīth which they do not quote from dependable books of ḥadīth. The words of ʿAlī al-Qārī contain an indication towards this: a Muslim must take aḥādīth from the people who are experts in that field, as the old Arabic sayings go, “The people of Makkah know its mountain paths best” and “The owner of the house knows best what is in it.”

<!-- TODO Fix the following title -->

[^x7]: Imām al-Nawawī's words in _al-Majmūʿ Sharḥ al-Muhadhdhab_ (1/60) can be summed up as follows: “The researching scholars of the People of Ḥadīth and others say that if the ḥadīth is weak, it will not be said regarding it, ‘The Messenger of Allāh \pbuh said/did/commanded/forbade...’ or any other phrase designating certainty, but instead it will be said, ‘It is reported/quoted/narrated from him...’ or other phrases suggesting uncertainty. They say that phrases of certainty are for ṣaḥīḥ and ḥasan aḥādīth, and phrases of uncertainty are for anything else. This is because phrases designating certainty mean that what follows is authentic, so they can only be used in the case of what is authentic, otherwise one would effectively be lying about him \pbuh.

		This convention is one ignored by most of the fuqahāʾ of our age, in fact, by most scholars of any discipline, except for the skilled muḥaddithīn. This is disgusting carelessness, for they often say about a ṣaḥīḥs ḥadīth, ‘It is reported from him that...,’ and about a ḍaʿīf one, ‘he said’ and ‘so- and-so reported...,’ and this is far from correct.”

[^x8]: Publisher's note: Also in this category are the works of our teacher, author of _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl fi takhrīj Manār al-Sabīl_ in 8 volumes, and _Ghāyah al-Marām fi takhrīj aḥādīth al-Ḥalāl wa al-Harām_, a takhrīj of the aḥādīth found in Dr.\ Yūsuf al-Qaraḍāwi's, _The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam_ (which contains many ḍaʿīf aḥādīth).

[^x9]: The term, “authentic ḥadīth” includes ṣaḥīḥ and ḥasan in the eyes of the muḥaddithīn, whether the ḥadīth is ṣaḥīḥ li dhātihī or ṣaḥīḥ li ghayrihī, or ḥasan li dhātihī or ḥasan li ghayrihī.

[^x10]: Sūrah al-Najm, 53:28.

[^x11]: Sūrah al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^x12]: Ṣaḥīḥ – collected by at-Tirmidhī, Aḥmad and Ibn Abī Shaybah.

		Later, I discovered that this ḥadīth is actually ḍaʿīf: I had relied on Manāwī in declaring ṣaḥīḥ the isnād of Ibn Abī Shaybah, but then I happened to come across it myself, and found that it was clearly weak, being the same isnād as at-Tirmidhī and others – see my book _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al- Ḍaʿīfah_ (1783). However, its place is taken by the Prophet's \pbuh saying, “He who relates from me a saying which he knows is a lie is indeed one of the liars,” collected by Muslim and others.

[^x13]: ʿAbd al-Ḥayy al-Lucknowī says in _Imām al-Kalām fīmā yataʿallaq bi al-Qirāʾah Khalf al-Imām_ (p. 156), as follows: “Whoever dives into the oceans of fiqh and the fundamentals of jurisprudence with an open mind, and does not allow himself to be prejudiced, will know with certainty that in most of the principal and subsidiary issues in which the scholars have differed, the madhhab of the scholars of ḥadīth is firmer than other madhāhib. Every time I go into the branches of difference of opinion, I find the view of the muḥaddithīn nearest to justice – their reward is with Allāh, and He will thank them. How could it be otherwise, when they are the true inheritors of the Prophet \pbuh, and the sincere agents of his Law; may Allāh include us in their company and make us die loving them.”

[^x14]: Subkī says in _al-Fatāwā_ (1/148): “The most important affair of the Muslims is the Prayer, which every Muslim must care about and ensure its performance and the establishment of its essentials. Related to Prayer are issues on which there is consensus and there is no escaping the truth, and other issues in which the scholars have differed. The correct approach is either to keep clear of dispute if possible, or to look for what is authentically proven from the Prophet \pbuh and adhere to that. When one does this, his Prayer will be correct and righteous, and included in the words of the Exalted, “So whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him work correct, righteous deeds.” (Sūrah al-Kahf, 18:110)

		I say: The latter approach is superior, nay, obligatory; this is because the former approach, as well as being impossible for many issues, does not fulfil his command \pbuh, “Pray as you have seen me praying,” but instead leads to one's prayer being decidedly different to that of the Prophet \pbuh.

[^x15]: From the poetry of Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad al-Nasawī, as narrated by Ḥāfiẓ Diyāʾ al-Dīn al-Maqdisī in his article on the excellence of Ḥadīth and its People.

[^x16]: Sūrah al-Baqarah, 2:213.

[^x17]: Sūrah al-Tirmidhī, Qudāʾī, Ibn Bushrān and others.

<!-- TODO double check diacritics on Tahawi -->

[^x18]: This is the sort of taqlīd (blind following) which Imām Ṭahāwī was referring to when he said, “Only someone with party-spirit or a fool blindly follows opinion” – quoted by Ibn ʿĀbidīn in _Rasm al-Muftī_ (vol.\ 1, p.\ 32 from the Compilation of the Essays of Ibn ʿĀbidīn).

[^x19]: Sūrah al-A'raaf, 7:3.

<!-- TODO check spelling of haashiyah -->
<!-- TODO check spelling of Eeqaaz al-Himam -->
<!-- TODO check spelling of Ibn al-Shahnah al-Kabeer -->
<!-- TODO check spelling of Ibn al-Humaam -->

[^x20]: Ibn ʿĀbidīn in _al-Ḥāshiyah_ (1/63), and in his essay _Rasm al-Muftī_ (1/4 from the Compilation of the Essays of Ibn ʿĀbidīn), Shaykh Ṣāliḥ al-Fulānī in _Īqāz al-Himam_ (p. 62) and others. Ibn ʿĀbidīn quoted from _Sharḥ al-Hidāyah_ by Ibn al-Shahnah al-Kabīr, the teacher of Ibn al-Humām, as follows:

		“When a ḥadīth contrary to the Madhhab is found to be ṣaḥīḥ, one should act on the ḥadīth, and make that his madhhab. Acting on the ḥadīth will not invalidate the follower's being a Ḥanafī, for it is authentically reported that Abū Ḥanīfah said, ‘When a ḥadīth is found to be ṣaḥīḥ, then that is my madhhab,’ and this has been related by Imām Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr from Abū Ḥanīfah and from other imāms.”

		This is part of the completeness of the knowledge and piety of the Imāms, for they indicated by saying this that they were not versed in the whole of the Sunnah, and Imām Shāfiʿī has elucidated this thoroughly (see later). It would happen that they would contradict a sunnah because they were unaware of it, so they commanded us to stick to the Sunnah and regard it as part of their Madhhab. May Allāh shower His mercy on them all.

[^x21]: Arabic: ḥalāl.

<!-- TODO check the following book title -->
<!-- TODO check the title of Ibn Qayyim's book -->
<!-- TODO check the name of Shaʿraani -->
<!-- TODO check the title of Eeqaaz -->

[^x22]: Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr in _al-Intiqāʾ fi Faḍāʾil al-Thalāthah al-Aʾimmah al-Fuqahāʾ_ (p. 145), Ibn al-Qayyim in _Iʿlām al-Mūqiʿīn_ (2/309), Ibn ʿĀbidīn in his footnotes on _al-Baḥr al-Rāʾiq_ (6/293) and in _Rasm al-Muftī_ (pp.\ 29, 32) and Shaʿrānī in _al-Mīzān_ (1/55) with the second narration. The last narration was collected by ʿAbbās al-Dawrī in _al-Tārīkh_ by Ibn Maʿīn (6/77/1) with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad on the authority of Zafar, the student of Imām Abū Ḥanīfah. Similar narrations exist on the authority of Abū Ḥanīfah's companions: Zafar, Abū Yūsuf and ʿĀfiyah ibn Yazīd; cf. _Eeqaaz_ (p. 52). Ibn al-Qayyim firmly certified its authenticity on the authority of Abū Yūsuf in _Iʿlām al-Mūqiʿīn_ (2/344). The addition to the second narration is referenced by the editor of _Eeqaaz_ (p. 65) to Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Ibn al-Qayyim and others.

		If this is what they say of someone who does not know their evidence, what would be their response to one who knows that the evidence contradicts their saying, but still gives verdicts opposed to the evidence?! Therefore, reflect on this saying, for it alone is enough to smash blind following of opinion; that is why one of the muqallid shaykhs, when I criticised his giving a verdict using Abū Ḥanīfah's words without knowing the evidence, refused to believe that it was a saying of Abū Ḥanīfah!

[^x23]: Arabic: ḥarām.

[^x24]: Arabic: fatwā.

[^x25]: i.e. Imām Abū Ḥanīfah's illustrious student, Abū Yūsuf.

[^x26]: This was because the Imām would often base his view on qiyās (analogy), after which a more potent analogy would occur to him, or a ḥadīth of the Prophet \pbuh would reach him, so he would accept that and ignore his previous view. Shaʿrānī's words in _al-Mīzān_ (1/62) are summarised as follows:

		"Our belief, as well as that of every researcher into Imaam Abu Haneefah (radi Allāhu 'anhu), is that, had he lived until the recording of the Sharee'ah, and the journeys of the Preservers of Hadeeth to the various cities and frontiers in order to collect and acquire it, he would have accepted it and ignored all the analogies he had employed. The amount of qiyaas in his Madhhab would have been just as little as that in other Madhhabs, but since the evidences of the Sharee'ah had been scattered with the Successors and their successors, and had not been collected in his lifetime, it was necessary that there be a lot of qiyaas in his Madhhab compared to that of other imaams. The later scholars then made their journeys to find and collect ahaadeeth from the various cities and towns and wrote them down; hence, some ahaadeeth of the Sharee'ah explained others. This is the reason behind the large amount of qiyaas in his Madhhab, whereas there was little of it in other Madhhabs."

		Abul-Hasanaat Al-Lucknowi quoted his words in full in An- Naafi' al-Kabeer (p. 135), endorsing and expanding on it in his footnotes, so whoever wishes to consult it should do so there.

		Since this is the justification for why Abu Haneefah has sometimes unintentionally contradicted the authentic ahaadeeth - and it is a perfectly acceptable reason, for Allāh does not burden a soul with more than it can bear - it is not permissible to insult him for it, as some ignorant people have done. In fact, it is obligatory to respect him, for he is one of the imaams of the Muslims through whom this Deen has been preserved and handed down to us, in all its branches; also, for he is rewarded under any circumstance: whether he is correct or wrong. Nor is it permissible for his devotees to continue sticking to those of his statements which contradict the authentic ahaadeeth, for those statements are effectively not part of his Madhhab, as the above sayings show. Hence, these are two extremes, and the truth lies in between. "Our Lord! Forgive us, and our brethren who came before us into the Faith; and leave not, in our hearts, any rancour against those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed Full of Kindness, Most Merciful." (Al-Hashr 59:10)

[^x27]: Al-Fulaani in Eeqaaz al-Himam (p. 50), tracing it to Imaam Muḥammad and then saying, "This does not apply to the mujtahid, for he is not bound to their views anyway, but it applies to the muqallid."

	Sha'raani expanded on that in Al-Meezaan (1/26): "If it is said: 'What should I do with the ahaadeeth which my Imaam did not use, and which were found to be authentic after his death?' The answer which is fitting for you is: 'That you act on them, for had your Imaam come across them and found them to be authentic, he would have instructed you to act on them, because all the Imaams were captives in the hand of the Sharee'ah.' He who does so will have gathered all the good with both his hands, but he who says, 'I will not act according to a hadeeth unless my Imaam did so', he will miss a great amount of benefit, as is the case with many followers of the Imaams of the Madhhabs. It would be better for them to act on every hadeeth found to be authentic after the Imaam's time, hence implementing the will of the Imaams; for it is our firm belief about the Imaams that had they lived longer and come to know of those ahaadeeth which were found authentic after their time, they would have definitely accepted and acted according to them, ignoring any analogies they may have previously made, and any views they may have previously held."

[^x28]: Ibn 'Abdul Barr in Jaami' Bayaan al-'Ilm (2/32), Ibn Hazm, quoting from the former in Usool al-Ahkaam (6/149), & similarly Al-Fulaani (p. 72)

[^x29]: This is well known among the later scholars to be a saying of Maalik. Ibn 'Abdul Haadi declared it saheeh in Irshaad as- Saalik (227/1); Ibn 'Abdul Barr in Jaami' Bayaan al-'Ilm (2/91) & Ibn Hazm in Usool al-Ahkaam (6/145, 179) had narrated it as a saying of Al-Hakam ibn 'Utaibah and Mujaahid; Taqi ad- Deen as-Subki gave it, delighted with its beauty, in al- Fataawaa (1/148) as a saying of Ibn 'Abbaas, and then said: "These words were originally those of Ibn 'Abbaas and Mujaahid, from whom Maalik (radi Allāhu 'anhu) took them, and he became famous for them." It seems that Imaam Ahmad then took this saying from them, as Abu Daawood has said in Masaa'il of Imaam Ahmad (p. 276): "I heard Ahmad say, 'Everyone is accepted and rejected in his opinions, with the exception of the Prophet (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam)'."

[^x30]: From the Introduction to Al-Jarh wat-Ta'deel of Ibn Abi Haatim, pp. 31-2.

[^x31]: Ibn Hazm says in Usool al-Ahkaam (6/118): "Indeed, all the fuqahaa' whose opinions are followed were opposed to taqleed, and they forbade their companions from following their opinion blindly. The sternest among them in this regard was Shaafi'i (rahimahullaah), for he repeatedly emphasised, more than anyone else, following the authentic narrations and accepting whatever the proof dictated; he also made himself innocent of being followed totally, and announced this to those around him. May this benefit him in front of Allāh, and may his reward be of the highest, for he was the cause of great good."

[^x32]: Related by Haakim with a continuous sanad up to Shaafi'i, as in Taareekh Dimashq of Ibn 'Asaakir (15/1/3), I'laam al- Mooqi'een (2/363, 364) & Eeqaaz (p. 100).

[^x33]: Ar.: halaal

[^x34]: Ibn al-Qayyim (2/361) & Fulaani (p. 68)

[^x35]: Harawi in Dhamm al-Kalaam (3/47/1), Khateeb in Al-Ihtijaaj bi ash-Shaafi'i (8/2), Ibn 'Asaakir (15/9/10), Nawawi in Al- Majmoo' (1/63), Ibn al-Qayyim (2/361) & Fulaani (p. 100); the second narration is from Hilyah al-Awliyaa' of Abu Nu'aim.

[^x36]: Nawawi in Al-Majmoo' (1/63), Sha'raani (1/57), giving its sources as Haakim and Baihaqi, & Fulaani (p. 107). Sha'raani said, "Ibn Hazm said, 'That is, ... found to be saheeh by him or by any other Imaam'." His saying given next confirms this understanding.

	Nawawi says: "Our companions acted according to this in the matter of tathweeb (calling to prayer in addition to the adhaan), the conditions on coming out of ihraam due to illness, and other issues well-known in the books of the Madhhab. Among those of our companions who are reported to have passed judgment on the basis of the hadeeth (i.e. rather than the saying of Shaafi'i) are Abu Ya'qoob al-Buweeti and Abu l-Qaasim ad-Daariki. Of our companions from the muhadditheen, Imaam Abu Bakr Al-Baihaqi and others employed this approach. Many of our earliest companions, if they faced an issue for which there was a hadeeth, and the madhhab of Shaafi'i was contrary to it, would act according to the hadeeth and give verdicts based on it, saying, 'The madhhab of Shaafi'i is whatever agrees with the hadeeth.' Shaikh Abu 'Amr (Ibn as-Salaah) says, 'Whoever among the Shaafi'is found a hadeeth contradicting his Madhhab, he would consider whether he fulfilled the conditions of ijtihaad generally, or in that particular topic or issue, in which case he would be free to act on the hadeeth; if not, but nevertheless he found it hard to contradict the hadeeth after further analysis, he would not be able to find a convincing justification for opposing the hadeeth. Hence, it would be left for him to act according to the hadeeth if an independent imaam other than Shaafi'i had acted on it, and this would be justification for his leaving the Madhhab of his Imaam in that issue.' What he (Abu 'Amr) has said is correct and established. Allāh knows best."

	There is another possibility which Ibn as-Salaah forgot to mention: what would one do if he did not find anyone else who acted according to the hadeeth? This has been answered by Taqi ad-Deen as-Subki in his article, The Meaning of Shaafi'i's saying, "When a hadeeth is found to be saheeh, then that is my madhhab" (p. 102, vol. 3): "For me, the best thing is to follow the hadeeth. A person should imagine himself in front of the Prophet (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam), just having heard it from him: would there be leeway for him to delay acting on it? No, by Allāh ... and everyone bears a responsibility according to his understanding."

	The rest of this discussion is given and analysed in I'laam al-Muwaqqi'een (2/302, 370) and in the book of al-Fulaane, (full title:) Eeqaaz Himam ulu l-Absaar, lil-Iqtidaa' bi Sayyid al- Muhaajireen wal-Ansaar, wa Tahdheeruhum 'an al-Ibtidaa' ash- Shaa'i' fi l-Quraa wal-Amsaar, min Taqleed al-Madhaahib ma'a l- Hamiyyah wal-'Asabiyyah bain al-Fuqahaa' al-A'saar (Awakening the Minds of those who have Perception, towards following the Leader of the Emigrants and Helpers, and Warning them against the Innovation Widespread among Contemporary Jurists in the Towns and Cities, of following Madhhabs with Zeal and Party- Spirit). The latter is a unique book in its field, which every desirer of truth should study with understanding and reflection.

[^x37]: addressing Imaam Ahmad ibn Hanbal (rahimahullaah).

[^x38]: Related by Ibn Abi Haatim in Aadaab ash-Shaafi'i (pp. 94-5), Abu Nu'aim in Hulyah al-Awliyaa' (9/106), al-Khateeb in Al- Ihtijaaj bish-Shaafi'i (8/1), and from him Ibn 'Asaakir (15/9/1), Ibn 'Abdul Barr in al-Intiqaa' (p. 75), Ibn al-Jawzi in Manaaqib al-Imaam Ahmad (p. 499) & Harawi (2/47/2) with three routes from 'Abdullaah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal from his father that Shaafi'i said to him: ...etc; thus, it is authentic on the authority of Shaafi'i. This is why Ibn al- Qayyim attributed it definitely to him in I'laam (2/325), as did Fulaani in Eeqaaz (p. 152) and then said: "Baihaqi said, 'This is why he - i.e. Shaafi'i - used hadeeth so much, because he gathered knowledge from the people of Hijaaz, Syria, Yemen and 'Iraq, and so accepted all that he found to be authentic, without leaning towards or looking at what he had considered out of the Madhhab of the people of his land when the truth was clear to him elsewhere. Some of those before him would limit themselves to what they found in the Madhhab of the people of their land, without attempting to ascertain the authenticity of what opposed it. May Allāh forgive all of us'."

[^x39]: Abu Nu'aim (9/107), Harawi (47/1), Ibn al-Qayyim in I'laam al-Muwaqqi'een (2/363) & Fulaani (p. 104).

[^x40]: Ibn Abi Haatim in al-Aadaab (p. 93), Abul Qaasim Samarqandi in al-Amaali, as in the selection from it by Abu Hafs al- Mu'addab (234/1), Abu Nu'aim (9/106) & Ibn 'Asaakir (15/10/1) with a saheeh sanad.

[^x41]: Ibn Abi Haatim, Abu Nu'aim & Ibn 'Asaakir (15/9/2).

[^x42]: Ibn Abi Haatim (pp. 93-4).

[^x43]: Ibn al-Jawzi in al-Manaaqib (p. 192)

[^x44]: Fulaani (p. 113) & Ibn al-Qayyim in I'laam (2/302).

[^x45]: Ar.: ittibaa'

[^x46]: Abu Daawood in Masaa'il of Imaam Ahmad (pp. 276-7)

[^x47]: Ibn 'Abdul Barr in Jaami' Bayaan al-'Ilm (2/149).

[^x48]: Ibn al-Jawzi (p. 182).

[^x49]: an-Nisaa', 4:65

[^x50]: an-Noor, 24:63

[^x51]: Even against their fathers and learned men, as Tahaawi in Sharh Ma'aani al-Aathaar (1/372) & Abu Ya'laa in his Musnad (3/1317) have related, with an isnaad of trustworthy men, from Saalim ibn 'Abdullaah ibn 'Umar, who said: "I was sitting with Ibn 'Umar (radi Allāhu 'anhu) in the mosque once, when a man from the people of Syria came to him and asked him about continuing the 'Umrah onto the Hajj (known as Hajj Tamattu'). Ibn 'Umar replied, 'It is a good and beautiful thing.' The man said, 'But your father (i.e. 'Umar ibn al-Khattaab) used to forbid it!' So he said, 'Woe to you! If my father used to forbid something which the Messenger of Allāh (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam) practised and commanded, would you accept my father's view, or the order of the Messenger of Allāh (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam) ?' He replied, 'The order of the Messenger of Allāh (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam).' He said, 'So go away from me.' Ahmad (no. 5700) related similarly, as did Tirmidhi (2/82) and declared it saheeh.

Also, Ibn 'Asaakir (7/51/1) related from Ibn Abi Dhi'b, who said:

"Sa'd ibn Ibraaheem (i.e. the son of 'Abdur Rahmaan ibn 'Awf) passed judgment on a man on the basis of the opinion of Rabee'ah ibn Abu 'Abdur Rahmaan, so I informed him of the saying of the Messenger of Allāh (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam) which was contradictory to the judgment. Sa'd said to Rabee'ah, 'We have Ibn Abi Dhi'b, whom I regard to be reliable, narrating from the Prophet (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam) contrary to what I ruled.' Rabee'ah said to him, 'You have made your effort, and your judgment has been passed.' Sa'd said, 'Most amazing! I enforce the decree of Sa'd, and not the decree of the Messenger of Allāh (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam)! No, I shall withdraw the decree of Sa'd, son of the mother of Sa'd, and enforce the decree of the Messenger of Allāh (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam).' So Sa'd called for the written decree, tore it up and gave a new verdict."

[^x52]: In fact, he would be rewarded, because of the Prophet's saying (sallAllāhu 'alaihi wa sallam): **"When a judge passes judgment, if he makes his effort (ijtihaad) and rules correctly, he will have two rewards; if he makes his effort (ijtihaad) and rules wrongly, he will have one reward."** (Related by Bukhaari, Muslim & others.)

[^x53]: Quoted in the notes on Eeqaaz al-Himam (p. 93)

[^x54]: Fulaani (p. 99)

[^x55]: cf. al-Waaqi'ah 56:13-14

[^x56]: Ibn 'Aabideen in Haashiyah (1/62), & Lucknowi gave its source in an-Naafi' al-Kabeer (p. 93) as Ghazaali .

[^x57]: He himself says at the beginning of his Concise Shaafi'i Fiqh (printed in the margin of Imaam Shaafi'i's Al-Umm): "This book is a selection from the knowledge of Muḥammad ibn Idrees al-Shaafi'i (rahimahullaah) and from the meanings of his sayings, to aid the understanding of whoever wants it, knowing of his forbidding the following of his, or anyone else's, opinion, so that such a person may carefully look for his Deen in it."

[^x58]: In which he has explained his opposing his Imaam in about twenty masaa'il (nos. 42, 44, 103, 120, 158, 169, 172, 173, 228, 230, 240, 244, 274, 275, 284, 314, 331, 338, 355, 356 - from Ta'leeq al-Mumajjid 'alaa Muwatta' Muḥammad (Important Notes on Muḥammad's Muwatta'))

[^x59]: Ibn 'Aabideen mentioned him among them in Haashiyah (1/74) & in Rasm al-Mufti (1/17). Qurashi mentioned him in Al- Jawaahir al-Madiyyah fi Tabaqaat al-Hanafiyyah (p. 347) and said, "He was a reliable transmitter of Hadeeth. He and his brother Ibraaheem were the two shaikhs of Balakh of their time."

[^x60]: Al-Fawaa'id al-Bahiyyah fi Taraajum al-Hanafiyyah (p. 116)

[^x61]: Al-Bahr ar-Raa'iq (6/93) & Rasm al-Mufti (1/28).

[^x62]: Al-Fawaa'id ... (p. 116); the author then added a useful note:

	"From this can be deduced the falsity of Makhool's narration from Abu Haneefah: 'that he who raises his hands during Prayer, his Prayer is ruined', by which Ameer, the scribe of Itqaani, was deceived, as has been mentioned under his biography. 'Isaam ibn Yoosuf, a companion of Abu Yoosuf, used to raise his hands, so if the above-mentioned narration had any foundation, Abu Yoosuf and 'Isaam would have known about it ... It can also be deduced that if a Hanafi ignored the madhhab of his Imaam in an issue due to the strength of the evidence against it, this would not take him outside the ranks of the Imaam's followers, but this would in fact be proper taqleed in the guise of leaving taqleed; do you not see that 'Isaam ibn Yoosuf left Abu Haneefah's madhhab of not raising the hands, but he is stil counted as a Hanafi?... To Allāh I complain of the ignorance of our time, when they insult anyone who does not follow his Imaam in an issue because of the strength of evidence against it, and expel him from the fold of that Imaam's followers! This is not surprising when those who do this are from the ordinary masses, but it is amazing when it comes from those who imitate men of learning but plod along that path like cattle!"

[^x63]: an-Noor 24:51-52

