

# Misconceptions Cleared

The preceding introduction was written ten years ago, during which time it has become apparent to us that our words have had a positive effect on Muslim youth in guiding them towards the obligation in matters of their _Dīn_ and worship to return to the pure sources of Islām: the Book and the Sunnah. Among them, there was an increase in the ranks of of those who practiced the Sunnah and devoted themselves to it---Praise be to Allāh---such that they became conspicuous for it. However, I still found among some of them a steadfastness in failing to practice the Sunnah: not due to any doubt about its obligation after reading the Qurʾānic verses and narrations from the _Imāms_ about going back to the Sunnah, but because of some objections and misconceptions which they had heard from some _muqallid shaykhs_. Therefore, I decided to mention these incorrect notions and refute them, so that perhaps this would encourage more people to practice the Sunnah and thus be among the Saved Sect, Allāh Willing.

## Misconception One {.unnumbered}

Some of them say, “There is no doubt that it is obligatory to return to the guidance of our Prophet \pbuh in the matters of our _Dīn_, especially in the recommended acts of worship such as prayer, where there is no room for opinion or _ijtihād_, due to their immutable nature. However, we hardly hear any of the _muqallid shaykhs_ propounding this; in fact, we find them upholding difference of opinion, which they regard as flexibility for the _Ummah_. Their proof for this is the _ḥadīth_ which they repeatedly quote in such circumstances, when refuting the helpers of the Sunnah, ‘The difference of opinion (_ikhtilāf_) among my _Ummah_ is a mercy (_raḥmah_).’ It seems to us that this _ḥadīth_ contradicts the principles to which you invite and based on which you have compiled this book and others. So, what do you say about this _ḥadīth_?”

Answer: The answer is from two angles:

Firstly: This _ḥadīth_ is [not authentic]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}; in fact, it is false and without foundation. ʿAllāmah al-Subkī said, “I have not come across an authentic or weak or fabricated chain of narration for it,” i.e. no chain of narrators exists for this “_ḥadīth_”!

<!-- TODO Make some arrangements for Appendix 1 -->

It has also been related with the wordings: “...the difference of opinion among my Companions is a mercy for you” and “My Companions are like the stars, so whichever of them you follow, you will be guided.” Both of these are not authentic: the former is very feeble; the latter is fabricated. (See [Appendix 1])

Secondly: This _ḥadīth_ [contradicts]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} the Glorious Qurʾān, for the _āyāt_ forbidding division in the _Dīn_ and enjoining unity are too well-known to need reminding. However, there is no harm in giving some of them by way of example: Allāh says,

<!-- TODO double check this ayah's translation -->

> ...and do not fall into disputes, lest you lose heart and your power depart.[^b1]

> And do not be among those join deities with Allāh, those who split up their _Dīn_ and become sects---each party rejoicing with what it has![^b2]

> But they will not cease to differ, except those on whom your Lord bestows His Mercy.[^b3]

Therefore, if those on whom your Lord has mercy do not differ, and the people of falsehood differ, how can it make sense that differing is a mercy?!

Hence, it is established that this _ḥadīth_ is not authentic, neither in the chain of narration, nor in meaning; therefore, it is clear and obvious that it cannot be used to justify resistance towards acting on the Book and the Sunnah, which is what our _Imāms_ have commanded us anyway.

## Misconception Two {.unnumbered}

Others say, “If differing in the _Dīn_ is forbidden, what do you say about the differences among the Companions and among the _Imāms_ after them? Is there any distinction between their differing and that of later generations?”

Answer: Yes, there is a big difference between these two examples of differing, which manifests itself in two ways: firstly, in cause; secondly, in effect.

As for the differing among the Companions, that was unavoidable, natural difference of understanding: they did not differ by choice. Other factors of their time contributed to this, necessitating difference of opinion, but these vanished after their era.[^b4] This type of differing is impossible to totally remove and such people cannot be blamed in the light of the above mentioned _āyāt_ because of the absence of the appropriate conditions, i.e. differing on purpose and insisting on it.

However, as for the differing found among the _muqallidīn_ today, there is no overriding excuse for it. To one of them, the proof from the Book and the Sunnah is shown, which happens to support a _madhhab_ other than his usual one, so he puts the proof aside for no other reason except that it is against his _madhhab_. It is as though his _madhhab_ is the original, or it is the _Dīn_ which Muḥammad \pbuh brought, while other _madhāhib_ are separate _Dīns_ which have been abrogated! Others take the opposite extreme, regarding the _madhāhib_---for all their differences---as parallel codes of Law, as some of their later adherents explain[^b5]: there is no harm in a Muslim taking what he likes from them and leaving what he likes, because they are all valid codes of Law!

Both these categories of people justify their remaining divided by this false _ḥadīth_, “The differing among my _Ummah_ is a mercy”---so many of them we hear using this as evidence! Some of them give the reason behind this _ḥadīth_ and its purpose by saying that it ensures flexibility for the _Ummah_! Apart from the fact that this “reason” is contrary to the clear Qurʾānic verses and to the meanings of the _Imām's_ words mentioned, there is also text from some _Imāms_ to refute it.

Ibn al-Qāsim said,

> I heard Mālik and Layth saying about the differing of the Companions of the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh, “It is not as people say: ‘There is flexibility in it’; no, it is not like that, but it is a matter of some being mistaken and some being correct.”[^b6]

<!-- TODO check transliteration of the following -->

Ashhab said,

> Mālik was asked about the person who accepted a _ḥadīth_ narrated by reliable people in the authority of the Companions of the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh: “Do you see any flexibility there?” He said, “No, by Allāh, so that he may be on the truth. Truth can only be one. Two contradictory views, can both be correct?! Truth and right are only one.”[^b7]

Imām al-Muzanī, a companion of Imām al-Shāfiʿī said,

> The Companions of the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh indeed differed, and some of them corrected others. Some scrutinized others' views and found fault with them. If all their views had been correct, they would not have done so. ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb became angry at the dispute between Ubayy ibn Kaʿb and Ibn Masʿūd about prayer in a single garment. Ubayy said, “Prayer in one garment is good and fine.” Ibn Masʿūd said, “That is only if one does not have many clothes.” So ʿUmar came out in anger, saying, “Two men from among the companions of the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh, who are looked up to and learned from, disputing? Ubayy has spoken the truth and not cared about Ibn Masʿūd. But if I hear anyone disputing about it after this I will do such-and-such to him.”[^b8]

Imām al-Muzanī also said,

> There is the one who allows differing and thinks that if two scholars make _ijtihād_ on a problem and one says, “_Ḥalāl_,” while the other says, “_Ḥarām_,” then both have arrived at the truth with their _ijtihād_! It can be said to such a person, “Is this view of yours based on the sources or on _qiyās_ (analogy)?” If he says, “On the sources,” it can be said, “How can it be based on the sources, when the Qurʾān negates differing?” And if he says, “On analogy,” it can be said, “How can the sources negate differing, and it be allowed for you to reason by analogy that differing is allowed?! This is unacceptable to anyone intelligent, let alone to a man of learning.”[^b9]

If it is said further: “What you have quoted from _Imām_ Mālik that truth is only one, not plural, is contradicted by what is found in _al-Madkhal al-Fiqhi_ (1/89) by Shaykh Zarqāʾ, “The Caliphs Abū Jaʿfar al-Manṣūr and later al-Rashīd proposed to select the _madhhab_ of Imām Mālik and his book _al-Muwaṭṭā_ as the official code of Law for the Abbasid empire, but _Imām_ Mālik forbade them from this, saying, “Indeed, the Companions of the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh differed in the non-fundamental issues and were scattered in various towns, [but each of them was correct]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}.”

I say: This incident of _Imām_ Mālik is well-known, but his saying at the end, “but each of them was correct” is one for which I find no basis in any of the narrations or sources I have come across,[^b10] by Allāh, except for one narration collected by Abū Nuʿaym in _Ḥilyah al-Awliyāʾ_ (6/332), but with a chain of narrators which includes al-Miqdām ibn Dāwūd who is classified among the weak narrators by al-Dhahabi in _al-Ḍuʿafā_; not only this, but the wording of it is, “...but each of them was correct in his own eyes.” Hence the phrase “in his own eyes” shows that the narration in _al-Madkhal_ is fabricated; indeed, how could it be otherwise, when it contradicts what has been reported on reliable authority from _Imām_ Mālik that truth is only one and not plural, as we have mentioned, and this is agreed on by all the _Imāms_ of the Companions and the Successors as well as the four _Mujtahid Imāms_ and others. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr says, “If the conflicting views could both be right, the _Salaf_ would not have corrected each other's _ijtihād_, judgments, and verdicts. Simple reasoning forbids that something and its opposite can both be correct; as the fine saying goes,

> To prove two opposites simultaneously is the most hideous absurdity.”[^b11]

If it is said further, “Given that this narration from _Imām_ Mālik is false, why did he forbid al-Manṣūr from bringing the people together on his book _al-Muwaṭṭā_ rather than acceding to the Caliph's wish?”

I say: The best that I have found in answer to this is what Ḥāfiẓ Ibn Kathīr has mentioned in his _Sharḥ Ikhtiṣār ʿUlūm al-Ḥadīth_ (p.\ 31), that _Imām_ Mālik said, “Indeed the people have come together on, and know of, things which we are not acquainted with.” This was part of the excellence of his wisdom and impartiality, as Ibn Kathīr says.

Hence, it is proved that all differing is bad, not a mercy! However, one type of differing is reprehensible, such as that of staunch followers of the _Madhāhib_, while another type is not blameworthy, such as the differing of the Companions and the _Imāms_ who succeeded them. May Allāh raise us in their company, and give us the capability to tread their path.

Therefore, it is clear that the differing of the Companions was not like that of the _muqallidīn_. Briefly: the Companions only differed when it was inevitable, but they used to hate disputes, and would avoid them whenever possible; as for the _muqallidīn_, even though it is possible in a great many cases to avoid differing, they do not agree nor strive towards unity; in fact, they uphold differing. Hence there is an enormous gulf between these two types of people in their difference of opinion.

This was from the point of view of cause. The difference in effect is more obvious.

The Companions, despite their well-known differing in non-fundamental issues, were extremely careful to preserve outward unity, staying well-away from anything which would divide them and split their ranks. For example, there were among them those who approved of saying the _basmalah_ loudly (in prayer) and those who did not; there were those who held that raising the hands (in prayer) was recommended and those who did not; there were those who held that touching a woman nullified ablution, and those who did not---but despite all that, they would all pray together behind one Imam, and none of them would disdain from praying behind an Imam due to difference of opinion.

<!-- TODO check the “detestability” sentence -->

As for the _muqallidīn_, their differing is totally opposite, for it has caused Muslims to be divided in the mightiest pillar of faith after the two testimonies of faith: none other than the _Ṣalāh_ (prayer). They refuse to pray together behind one Imam, arguing that the Imam's prayer is invalid, or at least detestable, for someone of a different _madhhab_. This we have heard and seen, as others beside us have seen;[^b12] how can it not be, when nowadays some famous books of the _madhāhib_ rule such cases of invalidity or detestability. The result of this has been that you find four _miḥhrābs_ (alcoves) in some large congregational mosques, in which four Imams successively lead the prayer, and you find people waiting for their Imam while another Imam is already standing in prayer!

In fact, to some _muqallidīn_, the difference between the _madhāhib_ has reached a worse state than that, such as a ban in marriage between _Ḥanafīs_ and _Shāfiʿīs_; one well known _Ḥanafī_ scholar, later nicknamed _Muftī al-Thaqalayn_ (The Muftī of Humans and Jinn), issued a _fatwā_ allowing a _Ḥanafī_ man to marry a _Shāfiʿī_ woman, because “her position is like that of the People of the Book!”[^b13] This implies---and implied meanings are acceptable to them---that the reverse case is not allowed, i.e. a _Ḥanafī_ woman marrying a _Shāfiʿī_ man, just as a Muslim woman cannot marry a Jew or Christian!

These two examples, out of many, are enough to illustrate to anyone intelligent the evil effects of the differing of the later generations and their insistence upon it, unlike the differing of the earlier generations (the _Salaf_), which did not have any adverse effect on the _Ummah_. Because of this, the latter are exempt from the verses prohibiting division in the _Dīn_, unlike the later generations. May Allāh guide us all to the Straight Path.

Further, how we wish that the harm caused by such differing be limited to among themselves and not extend to the other peoples being given _daʿwah_, for then it would not be that bad, but it is so sad when they allow it to reach the non-believers in many areas around the world, and their differing obstructs the entry of people in large numbers into the Dīn of Allāh! The book _Ẓalām min al-Gharb_ by Muḥammad al-Ghazzālī (p.\ 200) records the following incident,

> It so happened during a conference held at the University of Princeton in America that one of the speakers raised a question, one which is a favorite of the Orientalists and the attackers of Islām: “Which teachings do the Muslims advance to the world in order to specify the Islām towards which they are inviting? Is it Islāmic teachings as understood by the Sunnis? Or is it as understood by the _Imāmī_ or _Zaydī Shīʿahs_? Moreover, all of these are divided further amongst themselves, and further, some of them believe in limited progression in thought, while others believe obstinately in fixed ideas.” The result was that the inviters to Islām left those being invited in confusion, for they were themselves utterly confused.[^b14]

In the preface to _Hadiyyah al-Sulṭān ilā Muslimī Bilād al-Yābān_ by ʿAllāmah Sulṭān al-Maʿṣūmī, the author says,

> A query was posed to me by the Muslims from Japan, from the cities of Tokyo and Osaka in the far east, “What is the actual _Dīn_ of Islām? What is a _madhhab_? Is it necessary for one ennobled by the _Dīn_ of Islām to adhere to one of the four _Madhhabs_? That is, should he be _Mālikī_, _Ḥanafī_, _Shāfiʿī_ or _Ḥanbalī_, or is it not necessary?” This was because a major differing, a filthy dispute, had occurred here, when a number of groups of Japanese intellectuals wanted to enter into the _Dīn_ of Islām, and be ennobled by the nobility of _Īmān_. When they proposed this to some Muslims present in Tokyo, some people from India said, “It is best that they choose the _Madhhab_ of _Abū Ḥanīfah_, for he is the Lamp of the _Ummah_”; some people from Indonesia (Java) said, “No, they should be _Shāfiʿī_!” So when the Japanese heard these statements, they were extremely perplexed and were thrown off their original purpose. Hence the issue of the _madhhabs_ became a barrier in the path of their accepting Islām!

## Misconception Three {.unnumbered}

Others have the idea that what we invite to, of following the Sunnah and not accepting the views of the _Imāms_ contrary to it, means to completely abandon following their views and benefiting from their opinions and _ijtihād_.

Answer: This idea is as far as can be from the truth---it is false and obviously flawed, as is clearly evident from our previous discussion, all of which suggests otherwise. All that we are calling to is to stop treating the _madhhab_ as a _Dīn_, placing it in the position of the Qurʾān and the Sunnah, such that it is referred to in the case of dispute or when extracting a new judgment for unexpected circumstances, as the so-called jurists of this age do when setting new rules for personal matters, marriage, divorce, etc, instead of referring to the Qurʾān and the Sunnah to distinguish the right from the wrong, the truth from falsehood---all of this on the basis of their “Differing is a mercy” and their idea of pursuing every concession, ease and convenience! How fine was the saying of Sulaymān al-Taymī:

> Were you to accept the concessions of every scholar, you would gather every evil.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

Related by Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr in _Jāmiʿ Bayān al-ʿIlm_ (2/91--91), who said after it, “There is _ijmāʿ_ (consensus of opinion) on this: I know of no contrary view.”

All this pursuing of concessions for the sake of it is what we reject, and it agrees with _ijmāʿ_, as you see.

As for referring to the _Imāms'_ views, benefiting from them, and being helped by them in understanding the truth where they have differed and there is no text in the Qurʾān and the Sunnah, or when there is need for clarification, we do not reject it. In fact, we enjoin it and stress upon it, for there is much benefit expected in this for whoever treads the path of being guided by the Qurʾān and the Sunnah. ʿAllāmah Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr says (2/182),

> Hence, my brother, you must preserve the fundamentals and pay attention to them. You should know that he who takes care over preserving the _sunnahs_ and the commandments stated in the Qurʾān, considers the views of the jurists to assist him in his _ijtihād_, open up different angles of approach and explain _sunnahs_ which carry different possible meanings, does not blindly follow the opinion of anyone of them the way the Sunnah should be followed without analysis, nor ignores what the scholars themselves achieved in preserving and reflecting on the _sunnahs_, but follows them in discussion, understanding and analysis, is grateful to them for their efforts through which they have benefited him and alerted him about various points, praises them for their correct conclusions, as in the majority of cases, but does not clear them of errors just as they did not clear themselves: such is the pursuer of knowledge who is adhering to the way of the pious predecessors; such is the really fortunate and truly guided; such is the follower of the Sunnah of his Prophet \pbuh, and the guidance of the Companions. But he who refrains from analysis, forsakes the method we have mentioned, disputes the _sunnahs_ with his opinion and desires to accommodate them only where his own view allows: such a one is straying and leading others astray. Furthermore, he who is ignorant of all we have mentioned, and plunges carelessly into giving verdicts without knowledge: such a one is even more blind, and on a path more astray.

## Misconception Four {.unnumbered}

There exists another common misconception among _muqallidīn_ which bars them from practicing the Sunnah which it is apparent to them that their _madhhab_ is different to it in that issue: they think that practicing that _sunnah_ entails faulting the founder of the _madhhab_. To them, finding fault means insulting the _Imām_; if it is not allowed to insult any individual Muslim, how can they insult one of their _Imāms_?

Answer: This reasoning is totally fallacious, and borne of not understanding the Sunnah; otherwise, how can an intelligent Muslim argue in such a way?!

The Messenger of Allāh \pbuh himself said, “When the one making a judgment strives his utmost and arrives at the correct result, he has two rewards; but if he judges, striving his utmost and passes the wrong judgment, he has one reward.”[^b15] This _ḥadīth_ refutes the above argument and explains lucidly and without any obscurity that if someone says, “So-and-so was wrong,” its meaning under the Sharīʿah is “So-and-so has one reward.” So if he is rewarded in the eyes of the one finding fault, how can you accuse the latter of insulting him?! There is doubt that this type of accusation is baseless and anyone who makes it must retract it: otherwise it is he who is insulting Muslims, not just ordinary individuals among them, but their great _Imāms_ among the Companions, Successors the subsequent _Mujtahid Imāms_ and others. This is because we know for sure that these illustrious personalities used to fault and refute each other;[^b16] is it reasonable to say, “They used to insult each other”? No! In fact, it is authentically-reported that the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh himself faulted Abū Bakr in his interpretation of a man's dream, saying to him, “You were right in some of it and wrong in some of it”[^b17]---so did he \pbuh insult Abū Bakr by these words?!

One of the astonishing effects this misconception has on its holders is that it prevents them from following the Sunnah when it is different to their _madhhab_, since to them practicing it means insulting the _Imām_, whereas following him, even when contrary to the Sunnah, means respecting and loving him! Hence they insist on following his opinion to escape from this supposed disrespect.

These people have forgotten---I am not saying:...pretended to forget---that because of this notion, they have landed in something far worse than that from which they were fleeing. It should be said to them, “If to follow someone means that you are respecting him, and to oppose him means that you are insulting him, then how do you allow yourselves to oppose the example of the Prophet \pbuh and not follow it, preferring to follow the _Imām_ of the _Madhhab_ in a path different to the Sunnah, when the _Imām_ is not infallible and insulting him is not _Kufr_?! If you interpret opposing the _Imām_ as insulting him, then opposing the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh is more obviously insulting him; in fact, it is open Kufr, from which we seek refuge with Allāh!” If this is said to them, they cannot answer to it, by Allāh, except one retort which we hear time and time again from some of them: “We have left this _sunnah_ trusting in the _Imām_ of the _Madhhab_, and he was more learned about the Sunnah than us.”

Our answer to this is from many angles, which have already been discussed at length in this Introduction. This is why I shall briefly limit myself to one approach, a decisive reply by the permission of Allāh. I say:

The _Imām_ of your _Madhhab_ is not the only one who was more learned about the Sunnah than you: in fact, there are dozens, nay hundreds, of _Imāms_ who too were more knowledgeable about the Sunnah than you. Therefore, if an authentic _sunnah_ happens to differ from your _madhhab_, and it was taken by one of these other _Imāms_, it is definitely essential that you accept this _sunnah_ in this circumstance. This is because your aforementioned argument is of no use here, for the one opposing you will reply, “We have accepted this Sunnah trusting in our _Imām_, who accepted it”---in this instance, to follow the latter _Imām_ is preferable to following the _Imām_ who has differed from the Sunnah.

This is clear and not confusing to anyone, Allāh Willing.

Because of all of the above, I am able to say:

Since this book of ours has collected the authentic _sunnahs_ reported from the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh about the description of his prayer, there is no excuse for anyone to not act on it, for there is nothing in it which the scholars have unanimously rejected, as they would never do. In fact, in every instance several of them have adopted the authentic _sunnah_; any one of them who did not do so is excused and rewarded once, because the text was not conveyed to him at all, or it was conveyed but in such a way that to him it did not constitute proof, or due to other reasons which are well-known among the scholars. However, those after him in front of whom the text is firmly established have no excuse for following his opinion; rather, it is obligatory to follow the infallible text.

This message has been the purpose of this Introduction. Allāh, Mighty and Sublime, says,

> O you who believe! Give your response to Allāh and His Messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life, and know that Allāh comes in between a man and his heart, and it is He to whom you shall all be gathered.[^b18]

Allāh says the Truth; He shows the Way; and He is the Best to Protect and the Best to Help. May Allāh send prayers and peace on Muḥammad, and on his family and his Companions. Praise be to Allāh, Lord of the Worlds.

Muḥammad Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī  
Damascus 28/10/1389 [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}

