

[^1]: Sūrah al--Anfāl, 8:46.

[^2]: Sūrah al--Rūm, 30:31-2.

[^3]: Sūrah Hūd, 11:118-9.

<!-- Check the following titles -->

[^4]: cf. _al--Iḥkām fī Uṣūl al-Aḥkām_ by Ibn Ḥazm, _Hujjatullāh al--Bālighah_ by al--Dehlawi, and the latter's essay dealing specifically with this issue, _ʿIqd al--Jīd fī Aḥkām al--Ijtihād wa al--Taqlīd_.

[^5]: See _Fayḍ al--Qadīr_ by al--Manāwī (1/209) or _Silsilah al-- Aḥādīth al--Ḍaʿīfah_ (1/76, 77).

[^6]: Ibn ʿAbd al--Barr in _Jāmiʿ Bayān al--ʿIlm_ (2/81-2).

[^7]: Ibid (2/82, 88-9).

[^8]: Ibid (2/83-4).

[^9]: Ibid (2/89).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^10]: cf. _al--Intiqāʾ_ by Ibn ʿAbd al--Barr (41), _Kashf al--Mughatta fī Faḍl al--Muwaṭṭāʾ_ (pp. 6-7) by Ibn ʿAsākir, and _Tadhkirah al--Ḥuffāẓ_ by al--Dhahabī (1/195).

[^11]: _Jāmiʿ Bayān al--ʿIlm_ (2/88).

[^12]: See Chapter Eight of the book, _Mā Lā Yajūz min al--Khilāf_ (pp. 65-72), where you will find numerous examples of what we have indicated, some of them involving scholars of Al-Azhar.

[^13]: _al--Baḥr al--Rāʾiq_.

[^14]: I now say: Muḥammad al--Ghazzālī's recent writings such as his newly-released book entitled _al--Sunnah al--Nabawiyyah bayna Ahl al--Ḥadīth wa Ahl al--Fiqh_ (The Prophetic Sunnah between the People of Ḥadīth and the People of Fiqh) have confirmed that he himself is one of those inviters to Islām who are “themselves utterly confused”! His writings have for long betrayed his confusion, his distortion of the Sunnah, and his using his intellect to authenticate or falsify aḥādīth, not by turning to the principles and science of ḥadīth, nor to the experts of that field; instead, whatever appeals to him, he authenticates, even if it is weak, and declares unreliable whatever is not to his liking, even if it is agreed to be authentic!

    His above approach is shown most obviously in his discussion of the aḥādīth in his previous book _Fiqh al--Sīrah_, where he explains his methodology of accepting unreliable aḥādīth and discarding authentic ones on the basis of the text of the ḥadīth alone, from which the reader can see that the objective criticism of ḥadīth has no value in his eyes if it contradicts a “reasoned analysis,” which varies enormously from person to person, for what is truth to one is falsehood to another! Thus the whole of Islām becomes subject to personal whims, having no principles nor reference points except personal opinion; this is poles apart from the position of the early leading ʿUlamā of Islām, “that the Isnād is part of the religion; were it not for the Isnād, people would have said whatever they wished.”

    His latest above-mentioned book has exposed to the people his Muʿtazilite methodology, his blatant disregard for the Imāms of Ḥadīth and their efforts over the ages in serving the Sunnah, and distinguishing the genuine traditions from the unreliable ones, and his lack of appreciation of the efforts of the Imāms of Fiqh in their laying down principles and developing issues on that basis, for he takes from these and leaves from them whatever he wishes, with no consistency towards any set of principles or fundamentals!

[^15]: al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^16]: See the previous words of Imām al--Muzanī and Ḥāfiẓ Ibn Rajab al--Ḥanbalī.

<!-- TODO arrange for appendix two -->

[^17]: al-Bukhārī and Muslim; see [Appendix Two]() for the full ḥadīth.

[^18]: Sūrah al--Anfāl, 8:24.

