

[^58]: Al-Nawawī says in _Rawḍah al-Ṭālibīn_ (1/224 Maktab al-Islāmī edition):

    “The intention is the purpose, so the person about to pray brings to mind that prayer and what is relevant of its characteristics, such as which prayer it is, whether it is obligatory etc. and he brings these things together in his intention with the first _takbīr_.”

[^59]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim and others. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#22).

[^60]: Muslim and Ibn Mājah. The _ḥadīth_ contains an indication that he did not use to commence it with the words of some people: “I intend to pray, etc.” which is in fact agreed to be an innovation. But they differ as to whether it is a good or bad innovation, to which we say: “Indeed all innovations in worship are misguided, from the generality of his statement \pbuh, ‘and all innovations are misleading, and every misleading thing is in the Fire.’” But this is not the place for a detailed discussion of this.

[^61]: Al-Ṭabarānī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^62]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#301).

  Literally, “the _takbīr_ makes it _ḥarām_,” i.e. the actions which Allāh has made _ḥarām_ during it, "and the _taslīm_ makes it _ḥalāl_," i.e. what is allowed outside prayer. Just as the _ḥadīth_ proves that the door to prayer is shut, no worshiper being able to open it except with purification, it similarly proves that the prayer cannot be entered except with _takbīr_, and that it cannot be exited except with _taslīm_. This is the view of the majority of scholars.

[^63]: Aḥmad and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^64]: Muslim and al-Nasāʾī.

[^65]: Aḥmad and al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^66]: Al-Bukhārī and al-Nasāʾī.

[^67]: Ibid.

[^68]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^69]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/62/2, 64/1), Tammām, and al\-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^70]: Al-Bukhārī and al-Nasāʾī.

[^71]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^72]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd. It is also given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#352).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^73]: Ibn Ḥibbān and Ḍiyāʾ, with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^74]: Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd, with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

<!-- TODO what does 485 mean? -->

[^75]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/54/2) with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_, and Ibn Ḥibbān declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ (#485).

[^76]: Mālik, al-Bukhārī and Abū ʿAwānah.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^77]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Dāraquṭnī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. In this _ḥadīth_ there is evidence that grasping is from the _sunnah_, and in the previous _ḥadīth_ that so is placing, so both are _sunnah_. As for the combination of holding and placing, which some of the later _Ḥanafīs_ hold to be good, then that is an innovation; its form as they state is to place the right hand on the left, holding the wrist with the little finger and the thumb, and laying flat the remaining three fingers, as described in Ibn ʿĀbidīn's footnotes on _al-Durr al-Mukhtār_ (1/454); so do not be confused by what they say.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->
<!-- TODO worry about appendix 4 -->

[^78]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/54/2), Aḥmad and Abū Shaykh in _Tārīkh Aṣbahān_ (p.\ 125); Al-Tirmidhī declared one of its _isnāds ḥasan_, and its meaning is found in _al-Muwaṭṭā_ and _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī_ if considered carefully. I have fully quoted the _isnāds_ of this _ḥadīth_ in my book _Aḥkām al-Janāʾiz_ (p.\ 118).

    [note:]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} To place them on the chest is what is proved in the Sunnah, and all that is contrary to it is either _ḍaʿīf_ or totally baseless. In fact, Imām Isḥāq ibn Rāhawayh acted on this _sunnah_, as Marwazī said in _Masāʾil_ (p.\ 222): “Isḥāq used to pray _witr_ with us and he would raise his hands in _qunūt_, and make the _qunūt_ before bowing, and place his hands on his breast or just under his breast.” Similar is the saying of Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ al-Mālikī in _Mustahabbāt al-Ṣalāh_ in his book _al-Iʿlām_ (p.\ 15, 3rd edition, Rabat): “the right arm is to be placed on the back of the left, on the upper part of the chest.” Close to this is what ʿAbd Allah ibn Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal related in his _Masāʾil_ (p.\ 62): “I saw that when praying, my father placed his hands, one on the other, above the navel.” See Appendix 4.

[^79]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#374) as well as the following one.

[^80]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī and others.

[^81]: Al-Bayhaqī and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and it is as he said. It also has a strengthening _ḥadīth_ reported by ten of his Companions: transmitted by Ibn ʿAsākir (17/202/2). See _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#354).

    [NB:]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} These two _aḥādīth_ show that the _sunnah_ is to fix one's sight on the place of prostration on the ground, so the action of some worshipers of closing their eyes during Prayer is misdirected piety, for the best guidance is the guidance of Muhammad \pbuh.

[^82]: Ibid.

[^83]: Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_ (_Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_, #1771); what is meant here by ‘the House’ is the _Kaʿbah_, as the context of this _ḥadīth_ shows.

[^84]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^85]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, and Sirāj.

[^86]: Al-Tirmidhī and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, cf. _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Targhīb_ (#353).

[^87]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^88]: Transmitted by Abū Dāwūd and others. Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Ḥibbān declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_. See _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Targhīb_ (#555).

[^89]: Aḥmad and Abu Yaʿlā. See _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Targhīb_ (#556).

<!-- TODO double check the following footnote -->

[^90]: Mukhlis in _Aḥādīth Muntaqāh_, al-Ṭabarānī, Rūyānī, Ibn Mājah, Aḥmad, Ibn ʿAsākir, and Ḍiyā in _al\-Mukhtārah_. Haytamī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ in _Asnā al-Matālib_.

[^91]: Muslim.

[^92]: A woolen garment having marks.

[^93]: A coarse garment without marks.

[^94]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, and Mālik. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#376).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^95]: A small room embedded in the ground slightly, like a small chamber or cupboard. (_Nihāyah_)

[^96]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, and Abū ʿAwānah. The Messenger \pbuh did not order the wiping out or tearing of the pictures but only removed them because---and Allāh knows best---they were not pictures of things having souls. The evidence for this is that he \pbuh tore other pictures as proved by many narrations in al-Bukhārī and Muslim, and whoever wishes to explore this further should consult _Ghāyah al-Marām fī Takhrīj Aḥādīth al\-Ḥalāl wa al\-Ḥarām_ (#131--145) and _Fatḥ al-Bārī_ (10/321).

[^97]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.


