

[^14]: i.e. the _ʿAsr_ prayer according to the correct saying of the majority of scholars, among them Abū Ḥanīfah and his two students. There are _aḥādīth_ about this which Ibn Kathīr has given in his _tafsīr_ of the Qurʾān.

[^15]: Al-Tirmidhī, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, and Aḥmad.

[^16]: Muslim and al-Bukhārī, and it is given in my book _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ under _ḥadīth_ #394.

[^17]: Al-Bukhārī, Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad.

[^18]: Ibid. Khaṭṭābī said, “The meaning of ʿImrān's ḥadīth is intended for a sick person who is able to undergo hardship and stand with difficulty. Hence the reward of praying sitting has been made half of the reward of praying standing: encouraging him to pray standing while allowing him to sit.” Ibn Ḥajr said in _Fatḥ al-Bārī_ (2/468): “This deduction is valid.”

[^19]: Aḥmad and Ibn Mājah with a _ṣaḥīḥ sanad_.

<!-- TODO check the following names -->

[^20]: Al-Ṭabarānī, al-Bazzār, Ibn al-Samāk in his _ḥadīth_ book (67/2) and al-Bayhaqī. It has a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_ as I have explained in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ṣahīḥah_ (#323).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^21]: Al-Bazzār (#68), al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿAbd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī in his _Sunan_ (82/2) and al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^22]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, as did al-Dhahabī. I have given it in _al-Ṣaḥīḥah_ (#319) and _Irwāʾ_ (#383).

[^23]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^24]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^25]: i.e. voluntary prayer (night or forenoon), named so due to its content of _tasbīḥ_ (glorification).

[^26]: Muslim and Aḥmad.

[^27]: Al-Nasāʾī, Ibn Khuzaymah in his _ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/107/2), ʿAbd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī in his _Sunan_ (80/1) and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^28]: Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Mājah. It is a _mutawātir ḥadīth_ as al-Ṭaḥāwī has mentioned.

[^29]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bazzār (p.\ 53, _al-Zawaʾid_); Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī and al-Nawawī agreed. The first one is given in _Irwāʾ_ (#284).

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/110/2) with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^34]: This is the _sunnah_ about the pulpit: that it should have three steps, not more, To have more is an innovation, from the period of _Banī ʿUmayyah_, which often causes an interruption in the row, and to get out of that by having it in the western corner of the mosque or in the _miḥrāb_ is another innovation, as is the raising of it in the wall like a balcony to which one ascends by means of steps in the wall! Whereas the best guidance is the guidance of Muḥammad \pbuh. See _Fatḥ al-Bārī_ (2/331).

[^35]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim (who collected the other narration) and Ibn Saʿd (1/253). It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (#545).

[^36]: literally: screen, cover; in the context of prayer, it refers to an object just beyond the place of prostration, within which nothing should pass, as is detailed in this section.

[^37]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^38]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^39]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/93/1) with a sound _isnād_.

[^40]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Bazzār (p.\ 54, _al-Zawāʾid_) and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī and al-Nawawī agreed.

[^41]: Al-Bukhārī. The _sutrah_ is a must for the Imam or a person praying alone, even in a large mosque. Ibn Hānī said in his _Masāʾil_ (1/66) from Imām Aḥmad: “Abū ʿAbd Allāh (i.e. Imām Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal) saw me one day when I was praying without a _sutrah_ in front of me, and I was in a (large) congregational mosque, so he said to me: ‘Take something as a sutrah,’ so I took a man as a _sutrah_.” This contains an indication that Imām Aḥmad did not differentiate between big or small mosques in taking a _sutrah_---and that is surely correct, but this is something neglected by most people, including Imams of mosques in every land that I have visited, including Arabia which I was able to tour in _Rajab_ of this year (1410 [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}), so the _ʿUlamā_ should tell the people and advise them of this, explaining its ruling and that it is also required in the Two Sacred Mosques.

[^42]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim and Ibn Mājah.

[^43]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^44]: i.e. their kneeling place.

[^45]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^46]: Muslim, Ibn Khuzaymah (92/2) and Aḥmad.

[^47]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^48]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^49]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim and Abu Yaʿlā (3/1107).

[^50]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/95/1), al-Ṭabarānī (3/140/3) and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^51]: Referring to the following prayer of the Prophet Sulaymān which was answered by Allāh, as described in the Qurʾān: “My Lord! Forgive me, and grant me sovereignty not allowed to anyone after me, for You are indeed the Granter of Bounties. So we subjected to his power: the Wind, gently flowing to his order, wherever he wished; and the devils, every kind of builder and diver, and also others bound together in fetters.” (Sūrah Ṣāḍ, 38:35--38)

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^52]: Aḥmad, al-Dāraquṭnī and al-Ṭabarānī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_, and similar in meaning to this _ḥadīth_ is found in al-Bukhārī and Muslim and others on the authority of several Companions. It is one of the many _aḥādīth_ which the Qādiyānī group disbelieve, for they do not believe in the world of the Jinn which is mentioned in the Qurʾān and the Sunnah. Their method of discarding the texts is well-known: if it is from the Qurʾān, they change its meaning e.g. the saying of the Exalted: “Say, it has been revealed to me that a group of Jinn listened” (Sūrah al-Jinn 72:1); they say “i.e. a group of humans”! making the word _jinn_ synonymous with “human”! Hence they play with the language and the religion; if it is from the Sunnah, then if it is possible for them to change it with a false interpretation they do so, otherwise they find it easy to declare it to be false, even if all the _Imāms_ of _Ḥadīth_ and the whole _Ummah_ behind them are agreed on its authenticity, nay its being _mutawātir_. May Allāh guide them.

[^53]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim, and the additional narration is from Ibn Khuzaymah (1/94/1).

[^54]: Ibid.

[^55]: i.e. mature, and what is meant by “cut off” is “rendered futile.” As regards the _ḥadīth_: “Nothing cuts off the prayer,” then it is a weak _ḥadīth_ as I have shown in _Tamām al-Minnah_ (p.\ 306).

[^56]: Muslim, Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/95/2).

[^57]: Ibid.

