

[^123]: The three Arabic words _hamz_, \textit{naf\kern 0.3ptkh}, and _nafth_, were interpreted such by the narrator; all three interpretations are also traced back to the Prophet \pbuh with a _ṣaḥīḥ mursal isnād_. By “poetry,” what is meant is the vain kind, for the Prophet \pbuh said: “Truly, some poetry is wisdom.” (Al-Bukhārī)

[^124]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, al-Dāraquṭnī, and al-Ḥākim who, along with Ibn Ḥibbān and al-Dhahabī, declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_. It is given along with the next one in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#342).

[^125]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī with a _ḥasan isnād_. Aḥmad endorsed it (_Masāʾil Ibn Hāni_, 1/50).

[^126]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Ṭaḥāwī, and Aḥmad.

[^127]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Sahmī (64--65); Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#343). Abū ʿAmr al-Dānī transmitted it in _al-Muktafā_ (5/2) and said: “This _ḥadīth_ has many routes, and it is what is depended upon in this regard, and several of the past Imams and reciters preferred to stop at every verse, even if some were connected (in meaning) to the one after.” I say: This is a _sunnah_ which has been neglected by the majority of the reciters of this age, let alone others.

[^128]: Tammām al-Rāzī in _al-Fawāʾid_, Ibn Abī Dāwūd in _al-Maṣāḥif_ (7/2), Abū Nuʿaym in _Akhbār Iṣbahān_ (1/104) and al-Hākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred. Both of these recitations are _mutawātir_.

[^129]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and al-Bayhaqī. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#302).

[^130]: Al-Dāraquṭnī, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, and Ibn Ḥibbān in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_. It is also in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#302).

[^131]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^132]: i.e. _Sūrah al-Fātiḥah_. It is an example of the wording including the whole prayer but intending only a part, as a way of emphasis on that part.

[^133]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and Mālik. Al-Sahmī has a supporting _ḥadīth_ of Jābir in _Tārīkh Jurjān_ (144).

[^134]: Al-Bājī said: “He is referring to the saying of The Exalted «And We have bestowed upon you seven of the Oft-Repeated and the Grand Recitation.» (Quran, 15:87). It is named the _seven_ because it has seven verses, and _oft-repeated_ because it is repeated again and again in prayer. It has been called _the grand recitation_ to specify this name for it, even though every part of the Quran is a grand recitation; similarly, the _Kaʿbah_ is _the House of Allāh_ even though all houses belong to Allāh; this is by way of specifying it and emphasizing its importance.”

[^135]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^136]: Al-Bukhārī in his article on _Recitation behind the Imam_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^137]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/80/2), al-Ḥākim, and al-Ṭabarānī. Ibn Ḥibbān along with al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al\-Dhahabī concurred. It is in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#303).

[^138]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it _ḥasan_; its _isnād_ is _ṣaḥīḥ_ (_Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_, #807).

[^139]: Arabic _hadhdhan_: reciting quickly, implying racing or hurrying.

[^140]: Al-Bukhārī in his pamphlet, Abū Dāwūd, and Aḥmad. Al-Tirmidhī and al-Dāraquṭnī declared it _ḥasan_.

[^141]: Mālik, al-Ḥumaydī, al-Bukhārī in his pamphlet, Abū Dāwūd and al-Maḥāmalī (6/139/1). Al-Tirmidhī declared it _ḥasan_; Abū Hātim al-Rāzī, Ibn Ḥibbān, and Ibn Qayyim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^142]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/97/1), Abū Dāwūd, Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and al-Ruwayānī in his _Musnad_ (24/119/1). It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#332, #394).

[^143]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/97/1), al-Dāraquṭnī, Ibn Mājah, al-Ṭaḥāwī, and Aḥmad from numerous routes, _musnad_ and _mursal_. Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah declared it strong, as in _al-Furūʿ_ of Ibn ʿAbd al-Hādī (48/2). Al-Būṣayrī declared some of its _isnāds ṣaḥīḥ_. I have discussed it in detail and investigated its routes of narration in the manuscript version and then in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#500).

[^144]: Ibn Mājah with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#506).

[^145]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and al-Sirāj.

[^146]: Al-Bukhārī in his article, Aḥmad, and al-Sirāj with a _ḥasan isnād_.

[^147]: Mālik and al-Bukhārī in \textit{Af\kern 0.12emʿāl al-ʿIbād} with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The view of the validity of recitation behind the Imam in quiet but not loud prayers was taken by Imam al-Shāfiʿī initially, and by Muḥammad the student of Abū Ḥanīfah in a narration from him which was preferred by Shaykh ʿAlī al-Qārī and other _shaykhs_ of the _madhhab_; it was also the position of the Imams: al-Zuhri, Mālik, Ibn al-Mubārak, Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, several of the _muḥaddithīn_, and it is the preference of Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah.

[^148]: Al-Tirmidhī and Ibn Mājah with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. Transmitted also by al-Ājurrī in _Ādāb Ḥamalah al-Qurʾān_. As for the _ḥadīth_, “He who recites behind the Imam, his mouth is filled with fire,” it is _mawḍūʿ_ (fabricated) and this is explained in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (#569)---see \hyperref[weakness-of-assorted-narrations]{\textit{Appendix E}}.

[^149]: Al-Bukhārī in _Juz al-Qirāʿah_ and Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^150]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Nasāʾī, and al-Dārimī; the additional wordings are reported by the latter two, and prove that this _ḥadīth_ cannot justify that the Imam does not say _āmīn_, as reported from Mālik; hence, Ibn Ḥajar says in _Fatḥ al-Bārī_, “It clearly shows that the Imam says _āmīn_.” Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr says in _al-Tamhīd_ (7/13), “It is the view of the majority of the Muslims, including Mālik as the people of Madīnah report from him, for it is authentic from Allāh's Messenger \pbuh through the _aḥādīth_ of Abū Hurayrah (i.e. this one) and that of Wāʾil bin Ḥujr (i.e. the previous one).”

[^151]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^152]: Al-Bukhārī in _al-Adab al-Mufrad_, Ibn Mājah, Ibn Khuzaymah, Aḥmad, and al-Sirāj with two _ṣaḥīḥ isnāds_.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The _āmīn_ of the congregation behind the Imam should be done loudly and simultaneously with the Imam, not before him as the majority of worshipers do, nor after him. This is what I finally find most convincing, as I have explained in some of my works, among them _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (vol.\ 2, #952) which has been printed and published by the grace of Allāh, and _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Targhīb wa al-Tarhīb_ (1/205). See \hyperref[analysis-of-the-narrations-regarding-the-saying-of-ux101mux12bn-by-the-imam-and-the-congregation]{\textit{Appendix F}}.

[^153]: Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_; the other _ḥadīth_ was transmitted by Ibn Abī Dāwūd in _al-Maṣāḥif_ (4/14/2). This and other similar _aḥādīth_ contain permission for infants to enter the mosque. As for the _ḥadīth_ on many lips: “Keep your small children away from your mosques...,” it is _ḍaʿīf_ and cannot be used for proof at all; among those who have declared it _ḍaʿīf_ are Ibn al-Jawzī, al-Mundhirī, al-Haytamī, Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, and al-Būṣayrī. ʿAbd al-Ḥaqq al-Ishbīli said, “It is baseless.”

[^154]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^155]: There are many _aḥādīth_ mentioned further on which prove this.

[^156]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/100/1), Aḥmad, and ʿAbd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī in his _Sunan_ (9/2) with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^157]: Ibn Naṣr and al-Ṭaḥāwī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_; I take the meaning of the _ḥadīth_ as: “Make every _rakʿah_ have a complete _sūrah_.” The order is one of preference, not compulsion, from the evidence which follows.

[^158]: Aḥmad and Abū Yaʿlā from two routes. Also see \hyperref[fajr-prayer]{\textit{Recitation in Fajr prayer}}.

[^159]: As he did in _Fajr_, as will follow.

[^160]: Details and sources will follow shortly.

[^161]: i.e. a _sūrah_ after _al-Fātiḥah_.

[^162]: Al-Bukhārī as _taʿlīq_ and al-Tirmidhī as _mawṣūl_, and he declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^163]: _Al-Naẓāʾir_: _sūrahs_ which are similar in meaning, e.g. they both contain advice, commandments, or stories.

[^164]: These are agreed to end at the end of the Quran; the soundest view is that they begin with _Sūrah Qāf_.

[^165]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^166]: The first number is that of the _sūrah_, while the second is the number of _āyāt_ in the _sūrah_. By inspecting the first of the two numbers in each case, it is easy to see that in many of these combinations, he \pbuh did not stick to the Quranic order of the _sūrahs_, so this is evidence for the permissibility of doing this, even though it is better to follow the sequence of the Quran. A similar case is to be found later under \hyperref[tahajjud-prayer]{\textit{Tahajjud Prayer}}.

[^167]: Muslim and al-Ṭaḥāwī.

[^168]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. This _ḥadīth_ is general, so it applies to both recitation during prayer, whether voluntary or obligatory, and outside it. Ibn Abī Shaybah (2/132/2) has transmitted from Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī and al-Mughīrah bin Shuʿbah \mabpwthemtwo that they used to say this in obligatory prayers, and from ʿUmar and ʿAlī \mabpwthemtwo without such specification.

[^169]: In the original, “the young man said.”

[^170]: Arabic _dandanah_: when someone speaks some words such that their intonation is audible but they cannot be understood; it is a little bit more than murmuring. (_Nihāyah_)

[^171]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_ (1634) and al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. It has a supporting narration in Abū Dāwūd (_Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_, #758) and the basic story is in al-Bukhārī and Muslim. The first addition is in one narration of Muslim, the second in Aḥmad (5/74), and the third and fourth in al-Bukhārī. Also under this heading is the _ḥadīth_ on the authority of Ibn ʿAbbās \mabpwthemtwo: “that the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh prayed two _rakʿahs_ in which he recited only _al-Fātiḥah_,” transmitted by Aḥmad (1/282), al-Ḥārith bin Abī Usāmah in his _Musnad_ (p.\ 38 of its \emph{Zawāʾid}\kern 0.9pt) and al-Bayhaqī (2/62) with a _ḍaʿīf isnād_. I used to declare this _ḥadīth ḥasan_ in previous works, until I realized that I had been mistaken, because this _ḥadīth_ depends on Ḥanẓalah al-Dawsī, who is _ḍaʿīf_, and I do not know how this was unknown to me; maybe I thought he was someone else. Anyway, praise is due to Allāh who guided me to recognize my mistake, and that is why I hurried to correct it in print. Then Allāh compensated me with this better _ḥadīth_ of Muʿādh \mabpwhim which relates to what the _ḥadīth_ of Ibn ʿAbbās \mabpwthemtwo indicated. Praise be to Allāh by whose Grace good actions are completed.

[^172]: There is _ijmā_ (consensus of opinion) of the Muslims on this, with successors passing it on from the predecessors, along with authentic _aḥādīth_ which establish this, as al-Nawawī has said, and some of them follow. See also _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#345).

[^173]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^174]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^175]: See the sections on his recitation in \hyperref[friday-prayer]{\textit{Friday Prayer}} and the \hyperref[eid-prayer]{\textit{Eid Prayer}} [both of them].

[^176]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^177]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^178]: ʿAbd al-Ḥaqq al-Ishbīlī said in _al-Ṣalāh wa al-Tahajjud_ (p.\ 244):

    > As for voluntary prayers during the day, there is nothing authentic from him \pbuh regarding either quiet or loud recitation, but it would seem that he used to recite quietly during them. It is reported from him \pbuh that once, during the daytime, he passed by ʿAbd Allāh bin Hudhayfah \mabpwhim who was praying and reciting loudly, so he said to him: “O ʿAbd Allāh, let Allāh hear, not us.” But this _ḥadīth_ is not strong.

[^179]: Muslim and al-Bukhārī in \textit{Af\kern 0.12emʿāl al-ʿIbād}.

[^180]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī in _Shamāʾil_ with a _ḥasan isnād_. The _ḥadīth_ means that he \pbuh used to moderate between quietness and loudness.

[^181]: Al-Nasāʾī, al-Tirmidhī in _Shamāʾil_, and al-Bayhaqī in _Dalāʾil_ with a _ḥasan isnād_.

[^182]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^183]: Ibid.

[^184]: The last seventh of the Quran, beginning with _Sūrah Qāf_ according to the soundest view, as before.

[^185]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^186]: Aḥmad, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/69/1), and al-Ḥākim who judged it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^187]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^188]: Muslim and al-Tirmidhī. It is given along with the next one in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#345).

[^189]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^190]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. And what is apparent is that he \pbuh did it on purpose to establish its validity.

[^191]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/76/1), Ibn Bushrān in _al-Amālī_ and Ibn Abī Shaybah (12/176/1); Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dha\-habī concurred.

[^192]: litreally “the two by means of which refuge is sought,” i.e. the last two _sūrahs_ of the Quran, both beginning «Say: I seek refuge...»

[^193]: Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^194]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^195]: Al-Nasāʾī, Aḥmad, and Bazzār with a good _isnād_.

[^196]: Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^197]: Mūsā is mentioned in _āyah_ 45: «Then We sent Mūsā and his brother Hārūn, with our signs and manifest authority.» ʿIsā is mentioned soon after in _āyah_ 50: «And We made the son of Maryam and his mother as a sign---we gave them both shelter on high ground, affording rest and security and furnished with springs.»

[^198]: Muslim and al-Bukhārī in _taʿlīq_ form. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#397).

[^199]: Aḥmad and Abū Yaʿlā in their _Musnads_, and al-Maqdisī in _al-Mukhtā\-rah_.

[^200]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^201]: Ibid.

[^202]: Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^203]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^204]: Muslim, Ibn Khuzaymah, and al-Ḥākim.

[^205]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^206]: Ibid.

[^207]: Ibn Mājah and Ibn Khuzaymah.

[^208]: Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Ibn Ḥibbān in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_, and Ibn Bushrān. Ibn Ḥajar declared it _ḥasan_ in _al-Aḥādīth al-ʿĀliyāt_ (#16).

[^209]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^210]: Muslim and al-Bukhārī in _Juz al-Qirāʾah_.

[^211]: Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_ and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/165/1).

[^212]: Aḥmad and Muslim.

[^213]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī, and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/67/2); the latter two declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^214]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/67/2).

[^215]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^216]: Aḥmad and Muslim. The _ḥadīth_ contains evidence that reciting more than _al-Fātiḥah_ in the last two _rakʿahs_ is a _sunnah_, and many Companions did so, among them Abū Bakr al-Ṣiddīq \mabpwhim. It is also the view of Imam al-Shāfiʿī, whether in _Ẓuhr_ or others, and of our later scholars, Abū al-Ḥasanāt al-Laknawī took it in _Notes on Muḥammad's al-Muwaṭṭā_ (p.\ 102) and said:

    > Some of our companions take hold a very strange view in obligating a _sajdah al-sahw_ (prostration for forgetfulness) for the recitation of a _sūrah_ in the last two _rakʿahs_, but the commentators on _al-Maniyyah_, Ibn Amīr Ḥājj, Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī, and others, have refuted this view extremely well. There is no doubt that those who said this were unaware of the _ḥadīth_, and had it reached them they would not have said so.

[^217]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^218]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/67/2) and al-Ḍiyā al-Maqdisī in _al-Mukhtārah_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^219]: Al-Bukhārī in _Juz al-Qirāʿah_ and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^220]: Muslim and al-Ṭayālisī.

[^221]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^222]: Ibid.

[^223]: Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_ and Ibn Khuzaymah.

[^224]: Aḥmad and Muslim.

[^225]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^226]: Ibid.

[^227]: Ibid.

[^228]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^229]: Al-Ṭayālisī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^230]: Ibn Khuzaymah (1/166/2), al-Ṭabarānī, and al-Maqdisī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^231]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^232]: Ibid.

[^233]: Called _al-Ṭawīlatayn_: _al-Aʿrāf_ (Quran, 7) is agreed to be one; _al-Anʿām_ (Quran, 6) is the other, according to the most correct saying, as in _Fatḥ al-Bārī_.

[^234]: Al-Bukhārī, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/68/1), Aḥmad, al-Sirāj, and al-Mukhliṣ.

[^235]: Al-Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al-Kabīr_  with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^236]: Aḥmad, al-Maqdisī, al-Nasāʾī, Ibn Naṣr, and al-Ṭabarānī.

[^237]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^238]: Aḥmad and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ḥasan_.

[^239]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, and al-Nasāʾī.

[^240]: Ibid.

[^241]: Ibid. It is also given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#295).

[^242]: Al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^243]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^244]: The narration is like this, with _al-Nisā_ before _Āl ʿImrān_, and thus it is evidence for (the permissibility of) departing from the order of _sūrahs_ found in the ʿUthmānī copy of the Quran in recitation. An example of this has already been seen.

[^245]: Muslim and al-Nasāʾī.

[^246]: Abū Yaʿlā and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred. Ibn al-Athīr says: “...the Seven Long Sūrahs are _al-Baqarah_ (Quran, 2), _Āl ʿImrān_ (Quran, 3), _al-Nisā_ (Quran, 4), _al-Māʾidah_ (Quran, 5), _al-Anʿām_ (Quran, 6), _al-Aʿrāf_ (Quran, 7) and _al-Tawbah_ (Quran, 9).”

[^247]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^248]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^249]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^250]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^251]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^252]: Al-Dārimī and Saʿīd bin Manṣūr in his _Sunan_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^253]: Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^254]: Al-Dārimī and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^255]: Arabic _shīrrah_: excitement, enthusiasm, keenness, energy. The _shīrrah_ of youth is its beginning and its fervor. Imam al-Ṭaḥāwī says:

    > This is the zeal of the Muslims in their actions which bring them nearer to their Lord. However they are bound to fall short and leave some actions (which they began due to this zeal) so the most beloved of their actions to Allāh's Messenger \pbuh were those done otherwise (and kept up), so he ordered them to carry out righteous deeds which they are able to do continually and keep to until they meet their Lord, Almighty and Majestic. It is narrated from him \pbuh to clarify this that he said: “The actions most loved by Allāh are those which are the most regular, even if they are little.”

    I say: this _ḥadīth_ which he prefixes with the words “it is narrated” is _ṣaḥīḥ_, agreed upon by al-Bukhārī and Muslim from the narration of ʿĀʾishah \mabpwher.

[^256]: Arabic _fatrah_: interval, break, lapse; referring here to a period of reduced enthusiasm.

[^257]: Aḥmad and Ibn Ḥibbān in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^258]: Ibn Saʿad (1/376) and Abū Shaykh in _Akhlāq al-Nabī_ (281).

[^259]: Al-Dārimī and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^260]: Ibid.

[^261]: Aḥmad and Ibn Naṣr with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^262]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^263]: Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^264]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd. This _ḥadīth_ and others make it disliked (_makrūh_) to stay awake the whole night, whether always or regularly, for it is against the example of the Prophet \pbuh; for if staying up the whole night were better, he \pbuh would have done so, and the best guidance is the guidance of Muḥammad \pbuh. So do not be deceived by what is narrated from Abū Ḥanīfah that he prayed _Fajr_ with the ablution of _ʿIshā_ for forty years! (Translator's Note: see _Tablīghī Niṣāb: Virtues of Ṣalāh_ by Mawlānā Zakariyyā Kandhalvī for examples of this type of claim) For this narration from him is totally baseless; in fact ʿAllāmah al-Fayrūzʿābādī says in _al-Radd ʿalā al-Muʿtariḍ_ (44/1):

    > This narration is a clear lie and cannot be attributed to the Imam, for there is nothing excellent about it, whereas it was the nature of the likes of the Imam to do the better thing; there is no doubt that the renewal of purification for each prayer is more excellent, most complete, and best. This is even if it is correct that he stayed awake the length of the night for forty consecutive years! This story seems more like a fairy tale, and is an invention of some of the extremely ignorant fanatics, who say it about Abū Ḥanīfah and others, and all of it is lies.

[^265]: Al-Nasāʾī, Aḥmad, and al-Ṭabarānī (1/187/2); Al-Tirmidhī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^266]: Al-Nasāʾī, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/70/1), Aḥmad, Ibn Naṣr, and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^267]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^268]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^269]: Al-Tirmidhī, Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Aṣamm in his _Ḥadīthah_ (vol.\ 2, #117), and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^270]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^271]: The evidence for these two _rakʿahs_ is found in _Saḥīḥ Muslim_ and others as a practice of the Prophet \pbuh, but they oppose his saying: “Make the last of your prayer at night odd _(witr)_,” transmitted by al-Bukhārī and Muslim. The scholars have differed in reconciling these two _ḥadīth_, none of them being convincing to me, so the most cautious thing is to leave the two _rakʿahs_ in compliance with the command of the Prophet \pbuh. Allāh knows best.

    Later I came across an authentic _ḥadīth_ which had a command for two _rakʿahs_ after _witr_, so the order of the Prophet \pbuh agrees with his action, and the two _rakʿahs_ are validated for everyone; the first command is thus one of recommendation, not negating the two _rakʿahs_. The latter _ḥadīth_ is given in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ṣaḥīḥah_ (1993). See \hyperref[the-two-rakux2bfahs-after-witr]{\textit{Appendix G}}.

[^272]: Aḥmad, Ibn Naṣr, al-Ṭaḥāwī (1/202), Ibn Khuzaymah, and Ibn Ḥibbān with a _ḥasan ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^273]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#345).

[^274]: Ibid.

[^275]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^276]: Ibid.

[^277]: Ibid.

[^278]: This is the saying of Imam al-Shāfiʿī, Aḥmad, and Isḥāq, and some of the later Ḥanafīs also took this view. As for the recitation of a _sūrah_ after it, this is the view of some of the Shāfiʿīs and it is the correct view.

[^279]: Al-Bukhārī, Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī, and Ibn al-Jārūd. The addition is not _shādh_ (odd) as al-Tuwayjirī thinks.

[^280]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Ṭaḥāwī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^c1]: Ibn al-Mubārak in _al-Zuhd_ (162/1, from _al-Kawākib_, 575), Aḥmad, and Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^c2]: Muslim and Mālik.

[^c3]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^c4]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^c5]: Al-Bukhārī in \textit{Af\kern 0.12emʿāl al-ʿIbād} with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^c6]: In the section on \hyperref[recitation-of-one-ux101yah-at-a-time]{\textit{Recitation of one āyah at a time}}.

[^c7]: Arabic _al-Tarjīʿ_: explained as a vibrating tone by Ibn Ḥajar; Al-Manā\-wī said: “It arises from a feeling of joy and happiness, which he \pbuh felt a good deal on the day of the conquest of Makkah.”

[^c8]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^c9]: Ibid. Ibn Ḥajar said in his commentary on (\kern 0.9pt\ \textarabic{\amirifont{آ آ آ}}\ ), “this is a _hamzah_ with a _fatḥah_, followed by a silent _alif_, followed by another _hamzah_.” Shaykh Alī al-Qārī quoted likewise from others and then said: “It is obvious that this is three prolonged _alifs_.”

[^c10]: Al-Bukhārī as _taʿlīq_, Abū Dāwūd, al-Dārimī, al-Ḥākim and Tammām al-Rāzī with two _ṣaḥīḥ isnāds_.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: This _ḥadīth_ was turned round by one of the narrators, who narrated it as “beautify your voices with the Quran.” This is a mistake in narration and understanding, and whoever declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ is submerged in error, for it contradicts the authentic explanatory narrations in this section. In fact, it is a prime example of a _maqlūb ḥadīth_, and the details of this brief note are in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (#5328).

[^c11]: A _ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth_ transmitted by Ibn al-Mubārak in _al-Zuhd_ (162/1, from _al-Kawākib_, 575), al-Dārimī, Ibn Naṣr, al-Ṭabarānī, al-Ḍiyā in _al-Mukhtārah_, and Abū Nuʿaym in _Akhbār Iṣbahān_.

[^c12]: Al-Dārimī and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^c13]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^c14]: Al-Mundhirī said, “_Taghannā_ does mean to recite in a pleasant voice.” Sufyān bin Uyaynah and others took the the view that it is to do with _istighnā_ (i.e. letting the Quran make one dispense with worldly pleasures), but this is rejected.

[^c15]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Ṭaḥāwī, and Ibn Mandah in _Tawḥīd_ (81/1).

[^c16]: The scholars have said that musical instruments here means a beautiful voice and that the family of Dāwūd refers to Dāwūd himself; the family of so-and-so can be specifically for so-and-so only; Dāwūd had an extremely beautiful voice. This is mentioned by al-Nawawī in his commentary on _Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim_.

[^c17]: ʿAbd al-Razzāq in _al-Amālī_ (2/44/1), al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Ibn Naṣr, and al-Ḥākim.

[^c18]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Ḥibbān, al-Ṭabarānī, Ibn ʿAsākir (2/296/2) and al-Diyā in _al-Mukhtārah_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^c19]: Arabic _al-Tafl_: to blow with a minimum amount of saliva. (_Nihāyah_)

[^c20]: Muslim and Aḥmad. Al-Nawawī says, “This _ḥadīth_ contains a recommendation to seek refuge from the devil when he tempts, along with spitting to the left three times.”


