

[^d21]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d22]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. This raising of the hands is reported as _mutawātir_ from him \pbuh, as is the raising of the hands on straightening up after _rukūʿ_. It is the _madhhab_ of the three Imams, Mālik, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, and of the majority of scholars of _ḥadīth_ and _fiqh_. Imam Mālik practiced it right up to his death, as reported by Ibn ʿAsākir (15/78/2). Some of the Ḥanafīs chose to do it, among them ʿIṣām bin Yūsuf Abū ʿAsamah al-Balkhi (d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 210), a student of Imam Abū Yūsuf, as has been explained in the \hyperref[introduction]{\textit{Introduction}}. ʿAbd Allāh bin Aḥmad reported from his father in his _Masāʾil_ (p.\ 60), “It is related from ʿUqbah bin ʿĀmir that he said about a man raising his hands during prayer, ‘He earns ten good deeds for each such movement.’” This is supported by the _ḥadīth qudsī_, “...he who intends a good deed and then does it, Allāh writes it down with Himself as from ten to seven hundred good deeds,” transmitted by al-Bukhārī and Muslim. See _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Targhīb_ (#16).

[^d23]: Ibid.

[^d24]: Ibid.

[^d25]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Nasāʾī. Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^d26]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d27]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^d28]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d29]: Al-Ḥākim and he declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_; Al-Dhahabī and al-Ṭayālisī agreed. It is given in _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_ (#809).

[^d30]: Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Ḥibbān in their _Ṣaḥīḥs_.

[^d31]: Ibn Khuzaymah and Al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^d32]: Al-Bukhārī, and al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^d33]: Al-Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al-Kabīr_ and _Muʿjam al-Ṣaghīr_, Ibn Mājah, and ʿAbd Allāh bin Aḥmad in _Zawāʾid al-Musnad_.

[^d34]: Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^d35]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bukhārī in _Juz al-Qirāʾah_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^d36]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d37]: This vision was physically real, and was one of his miracles; it was confined to during prayer: there is no evidence for it being of a general nature.

[^d38]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^d39]: Abū Yaʿlā in his _Musnad_ (340/3491/1), al-Ājurrī in _al-Arbaʿīn_, al-Bayhaqī, al-Ṭabarānī (1/192/1), al-Ḍiyā in _al-Muntaqā_ (276/1), Ibn ʿAsākir (2/226/2, 414/1, 8/14/1, 76/2) with a _ḥasan isnād_, and Ibn Khuzaymah declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ (1/82/1). Ibn Baṭṭah has a supporting _mursal_ narration for the first part of the _ḥadīth_, minus the addition, in _al-Ibānah_ (5/43/1).

[^d40]: Al-Ṭayālisī, Aḥmad, and Ibn Abī Shaybah; it is a _ḥasan ḥadīth_, as I have explained in my footnotes on _al-Aḥkām_ (1348) by ʿAbd al-Ḥaqq al-Ishbīlī.

[^d41]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/89/2), al-Ṭabarānī, and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^d42]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/89/1), Ibn Mājah, and Aḥmad with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^d43]: Abū ʿAwānah, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Sahmī (61); Al-Dāraquṭnī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^d44]: Aḥmad, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, al-Dāraquṭnī, al-Ṭaḥāwī, al-Bazzār, and al-Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al-Kabīr_, on the authority of seven Companions. Hence this refutes those who did not accept the specification of the glorifications to three times, such as Ibn al-Qayyim and others.

[^d45]: This can be deduced from the _aḥādīth_ which make it clear that he \pbuh used to make his standing, _rukūʿ_, and _sujūd_ equal in length, as mentioned after this section.

[^d46]: A _ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth_, transmitted by Abū Dāwūd, al-Dāraquṭnī, Aḥmad, al-Ṭabarānī, and al-Bayhaqī.

[^d47]: Abū Isḥāq said: _subbūḥ_ means “the one who is free of any defect,” while _quddūs_ means “the Blessed” or “the Pure.” Ibn Sayyidah said: “Glorified and Blessed are attributes of Allāh, Mighty and Sublime, because He is glorified and sanctified by others.” (_Lisān al-ʿArab_)

[^d48]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d49]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. “Implementing the Quran” refers to the saying of Allāh: «Then glorify with the Praises of your Lord, and seek His Forgiveness, for He is Oft-Returning.» (Quran, 110:3)

[^d50]: This is an example of use of a general phrase coming after mention of individual items.

[^d51]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Ṭaḥāwī, and al-Dāraquṭnī.

[^d52]: Al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: Is there proof for combining two or more of these _adhkār_ in one _rukūʿ_? The scholars have differed about this. Ibn al-Qayyim was uncertain about this in _Zād al-Maʿād_. Al-Nawawī chose the first possibility in _al-Adhkār_, saying, “It is best to combine all of these _adhkār_ if possible, and similarly with the _adhkār_ of other postures.” Abū al-Ṭayyib Ṣiddīq Ḥasan Khān disagreed with him, saying in _Nuzul al-Abrār_ (84), “It is narrated with one of them here, another one there, but I see no evidence for combining. The Messenger of Allāh \pbuh would not combine them in one go, but he would say one of them sometimes, another one sometimes; to follow is better than to start something new.” This latter view is the correct one, Allāh willing, but it is proved in the Sunnah to lengthen this posture, as well as others, until it is about the length of the standing: hence, if the worshiper wishes to follow the Prophet \pbuh in this _sunnah_, the only way is to combine _adhkār_, as Al-Nawawī said, and as Ibn Naṣr has related it in _Qiyām al-Layl_ (76) from Ibn Jurayj as done by ʿAtā, or to repeat one of the _adhkār_ for which there is text for repetition, and this is closer to the Sunnah. Allāh knows best.

[^d53]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#331).

[^d54]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah. The forbiddance is general, hence covering both obligatory and voluntary prayers. The addition in Ibn ʿAsākir (17/299/1), “as for voluntary prayers, then there is no harm” is either _shādh_ or _munkar_---Ibn ʿAsākir pointed out a defect in it--- so it is not permissible to act according to it.

[^d55]: Ibid.

[^d56]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^d57]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^d58]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd; Arabic _faqār_: vertebrae, “the bones making up the spine, from the base of the neck to the coccyx” according to _Qāmūs_. See also _Fatḥ al-Bārī_ (2/308).

[^d59]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^d60]: Ibid.

[^d61]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, Aḥmad, and Abū Dāwūd.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: This _ḥadīth_ doesn't prove that those following an Imam should not share with the Imam in saying: “Allāh listens to the one who praises Him,” just as it does not prove that the Imam does not share with those following him in saying: “Our Lord, to You be all Praise.” This is because the purpose of this _ḥadīth_ is not to set out exactly what the Imam and his followers should say in this position; rather, it explains that the followers' _taḥmīd_ should be said after the Imam's _tasmīʿ_. This is supported by the fact that the Prophet \pbuh used to say the _taḥmīd_ when he was the Imam, and also because the generality of his saying, “Pray as you have seen me praying,” dictates that the follower should say what the Imam says, e.g. _tasmīʿ_, etc. Those respected brothers who referred to us in this issue should consider this, and perhaps what we have mentioned is satisfactory. Whoever would like further discussion on this issue should refer to the article by al-Ḥāfiẓ al-Ṣuyūtī on this matter in his book _al-Ḥāwī lī al-Fatāwī_ (1/529).

[^d62]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim; al-Tirmidhī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^d63]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. The raising of the hands here is narrated in a _mutawātir_ way from the Messenger \pbuh, and the majority of scholars have supported it, including some Ḥanafīs. See previous footnotes under \hyperref[the-rukux16bux2bf]{\textit{Rukūʿ}}.

[^d64]: Ibid.

[^d65]: Ibid.

[^d66]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad. Ibn al-Qayyim erred on this point in _Zād al-Maʿād_, rejecting the combination of “O Allāh!” with “and,” despite the fact that it is found in _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī_, _Musnad Aḥmad_, in al-Nasāʾī, and Aḥmad again via two routes of narration from Abū Hurayrah, in al-Dārimī as a _ḥadīth_ of Ibn ʿUmar \mabpwthemtwo, in al-Bayhaqī from Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī \mabpwhim, and in al-Nasāʾī again as a _ḥadīth_ of Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī \mabpwhim.

[^d67]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim; al-Tirmidhī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^d68]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d69]: Ibid.

[^d70]: Arabic _jadd_: wealth, might, power; i.e. the one who has wealth, sons, might, and power in this world will not benefit from them in front of You; his possessions will not save him from You: only righteous deeds will benefit or save anyone.

[^d71]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d72]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d73]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#335).

[^d74]: Mālik, al-Bukhārī, and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d75]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, and Aḥmad. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#307).

[^d76]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim (first sentence only), al-Dārimī, al-Ḥākim, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad. “Bones” here refer to those of the spinal structure, the vertebrae, as has preceded in the main text.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The meaning of this _ḥadīth_ is clear and obvious: to be at ease in this standing. As for the usage of this _ḥadīth_ by our brothers from the Hijāz and elsewhere as evidence to justify placing the right hand on the left in this standing, it is far-removed from the meaning of the multitude of narrations of this _ḥadīth_. In fact it is a false argument, since the placing mentioned is not referred to with regard to the first standing in any of the narrations or wordings of the _ḥadīth_; therefore, how can “the bones taking their proper places” mentioned in the _ḥadīth_ be interpreted as referring to the right hand taking hold of the left before _rukūʿ_?! This would apply if all the versions of the _ḥadīth_ could be construed to mean this, so what about when they imply an obviously different meaning? In fact, this placing of theirs cannot be inferred from the _ḥadīth_ at all, since what is meant by “bones” is the bones of the spine, as confirmed by the Sunnah, “...he would stand straight until every vertebra returned to its place.”

    I, for one, am in no doubt that to place the hands on the chest in this standing is an innovation and a leading astray, for it is not mentioned in any of the _aḥādīth_ about prayer, despite their large number. Had this practice any foundation, it would have reached us by at least one narration. Further, not one of the _Salaf_ practiced it, nor has a single leading scholar of _ḥadīth_ mentioned it, as far as I know.

    This is not inconsistent with what Shaykh al-Tuwayjirī has quoted in his article (pp.\ 18--19) from Imam Aḥmad, “If one wishes, he may leave his hands by his sides, or, if he wishes, he can place them on his chest,” for Imam Aḥmad did not attribute this to the Prophet \pbuh, but said it from his own _ijtihād_ and opinion, and opinion can be erroneous. When authentic evidence establishes the innovatory nature of any practice, such as this one, then the saying of an Imam in its favor does not negate its being an innovation, as Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymīyyah has written. In fact, I see in these words of his, an indication that Imam Aḥmad did not regard the above-mentioned placing as being proved in the Sunnah, for he allowed a choice between practicing it and leaving it!---Does the respected Shaykh think that the Imam also allowed a similar choice regarding placing the hands before _rukūʿ_? Thus, it is proved that the placing of the hands on the chest in the standing after _rukūʿ_ is not part of the Sunnah. This is a brief discussion of this issue, which could be dealt with in more detail and depth, but due to lack of space here, that is done instead in my _Refutation against Shaykh al-Tuwayjirī_.

[^d77]: Aḥmad and al-Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al-Kabīr_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

