

[^e78]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e79]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e80]: Abu Yaʿlā in his _Musnad_ (284/2) with a good _isnād_ and Ibn Khuzay\-mah (1/79/2) with a different, _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e81]: Al-Nasāʾī, al-Dāraquṭnī and al-Mukhliṣ in _al-Fawāʾid_ (1/2/2) with two _ṣaḥīḥ isnāds_. This raising of the hands has been reported from ten Companions, and a number of the _Salaf_ viewed it as correct, among them Ibn ʿUmar, Ibn ʿAbbās, Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, Tāwūs, his son ʿAbd Allāh, Nāfiʿ the freed slave of Ibn ʿUmar, Sālim the son of Ibn ʿUmar, Qāsim bin Muḥammad, ʿAbd Allāh bin Dīnār and ʿAtāʾ \mabpwthem. Also, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān bin Mahdī said, “This is from the Sunnah,” it was practiced by the Imam of the Sunnah, Aḥmad bin Ḥanbal, and it has been quoted from Mālik and al-Shāfiʿī.

[^e82]: Ibn Khuzaymah (1/76/1), al-Dāraquṭnī and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred. All the _aḥādīth_ which contradict this are inauthentic. This way has been endorsed by Mālik, and similar is reported from Aḥmad in Ibn al-Jawzī's _al-Taḥqīq_ (108/2). Also, al-Marwazī quoted with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_, Imam al-Awzāʾī in his _Masāʾil_ (1/147/1) as saying, “I found the people placing their hands before their knees.”

[^e83]: Abū Dāwūd, Tammām in _al-Fawāʾid_, and al-Nasāʾī in \textit{Sunan al-Ṣugh\-rā} and _Sunan al-Kubrā_ (47/1) with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. ʿAbd al-Ḥaq declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ in _al-Aḥkām_ (54/1), and went on to say in _Kitāb al-Tahajjud_ (56/1), “it has a better _isnād_ than the previous one,” i.e. the _ḥadīth_ of Wāʾil which is the other way round (knees before hands). In fact, the latter _ḥadīth_, as well as being contradictory to this _ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth_ and the preceding one, is neither authentic in _isnād_ nor in meaning, as I have explained in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (#929) and _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#357).

    It should be known that the way to differ from the camel is to place the hands before the knees, because the camel places its knees first; a camel's _knees_ are in its forelegs, as defined in _Lisān al-ʿArab_ and other books of the Arabic language, and as mentioned by al-Ṭaḥāwī in _Mushkil al-Āthār_ and _Sharḥ Maʿānī al-Āthār_. Also, Imam Qāsim al-Saraqustī narrated in _Gharīb al-Ḥadīth_ (2/70/1--2), with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_, Abū Hurayrah's \mabpwhim statement, “No one should kneel the way a runaway camel does,” and then added, “This is in _sajdah_. He is saying that one should not throw oneself down, as a runaway (or untamed) camel does, hurriedly and without calmness, but he should go down calmly, placing his hands first, followed by his knees, and an explanatory _marfūʿ ḥadīth_ has been narrated in this regard.” He then mentioned the _ḥadīth_ above.

    As for Ibn al-Qayyim's extremely strange statement, “These words are incomprehensible, and not understood by the experts of the language,” it is answered by the sources which we have mentioned, and also many others which can be consulted. I have also expanded on this in the refutation against Shaykh al-Tuwayjarī, which may be published.

[^e84]: Ibn Khuzaymah (1/79/2), Aḥmad and al-Sirāj; Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#313).

[^e85]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e86]: Ibn Khuzaymah, al-Bayhaqī, and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e87]: Al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/82/2) and al-Sirāj have related the pointing of the toes in a different narration.

[^e88]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, as did Ibn al-Mulaqqin (27/2); it is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#309).

[^e89]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e90]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, as did Ibn al-Mulaqqin (27/2) it is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#309).

[^e91]: Abū Dāwūd and Ahmad with _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e92]: Ibn Khuzaymah (1/10/1) with a _ḥasan isnād_.

[^e93]: Al-Dāraquṭnī, al-Ṭabarānī (3/140/1), and Abū Nuʿaym in _Akhbār Iṣbahān_.

[^e94]: Al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/82/2) and al-Sirāj have related the pointing of the toes in a different narration.

[^e95]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd. Ibn Saʿd (4/157) related from Ibn ʿUmar that he liked to point whatever of his body he could towards the _qiblah_ when praying, even his thumbs.

[^e96]: Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Ibn Khuzaymah (#654), and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e97]: Al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e98]: Al-Tirmidhī and al-Sirāj; Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e99]: This movement of the hand was deduced from the grammar of the Arabic text (_Fath al-Bārī_).

[^e100]: i.e. to draw them in and prevent them from being scattered, meaning to gather the garment or hair with the hands for _rukūʿ_ and _sujūd_ (_Nihāyah_). This forbiddance is not only during prayer; the majority of scholars include tucking in the hair and garments before prayer in the prohibition. This is further strengthened by his forbidding men to pray with their hair tied, which follows later.

[^e101]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#310).

[^e102]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and Ibn Ḥibbān.

[^e103]: i.e. tied up or plaited.

[^e104]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Ibn Ḥibbān. Ibn al-Athīr says, “The meaning of this _ḥadīth_ is that were his hair loose, it would fall on the ground when in _sajdah_; hence, the man would be rewarded for the prostration of the hair. However, if the hair is tied, it is effectively as though it did not prostrate, for he compared him to someone whose hands are shackled together, since they would then not lie on the ground in _sajdah_.”

    It would seem that this instruction is limited to men and does not apply to women, as al-Shawkānī has quoted from Ibn al-ʿArabī.

[^e105]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ḥasan_; Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Ḥibbān declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_. See _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_ (#653).

[^e106]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^e107]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#359).

[^e108]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and Ibn Ḥibbān.

[^e109]: Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Mājah with a _ḥasan isnād_.

[^e110]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^e111]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū Dāwūd, and Aḥmad.

[^e112]: Aḥmad, and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

[^e113]: Ibn Khuzaymah (1/80/2), al-Maqdisī in _al-Mukhtārah_ and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e114]: Aḥmad, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, al-Dāraquṭnī, al-Ṭaḥāwī, al-Bazzār, and al-Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al-Kabīr_ on the authority of seven different Companions. See also the note on this _dhikr_ under \hyperref[the-rukux16bux2bf]{\textit{Rukūʿ}}.

[^e115]: See the previous note on this under \hyperref[the-rukux16bux2bf]{\textit{Rukūʿ}} also.

[^e116]: _Ṣaḥīḥ_, transmitted by Abū Dāwūd, al-Dāraquṭnī, al-Ṭabarānī, Aḥmad, and al-Bayhaqī.

[^e117]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^e118]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e119]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Ṭaḥāwī, and al-Dāraquṭnī.

[^e120]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^e121]: Ibn Naṣr, al-Bazzār, and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ but al-Dha\-habī disagreed, however, it has a support which is mentioned in the manuscript version.

[^e122]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e123]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Nasāʾī, and Ibn Naṣr.

[^e124]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (62/112/1) and al-Nasāʾī; Al-Ḥākim declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e125]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and Ibn Abī Shaybah (12/106/2, 112/1).

[^e126]: Ibid.

[^e127]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, and al-Bayhaqī. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#456).

[^e128]: Al-Nasāʾī, Ibn ʿAsākir (4/257/1--2), and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e129]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his _Ṣaḥīḥ_, with a _ḥasan isnād_ from Ibn Masʿūd (887) and al-Bayhaqī in _mursal_ form. Ibn Khuzaymah prefixed it with, _Chapter: Evidence that gesturing which is understood during prayer neither invalidates nor spoils the prayer_---this action is one which the People of Opinion have prohibited! In this regard, there are also _aḥādīth_ in al-Bukhārī, Muslim and others.

[^e130]: i.e. its color is pure black, with no other colors mixed with it (_Nihāyah_).

[^e131]: The whiteness refers to that part of the horse where chains and bangles are put, including the lower legs but not the knees.

[^e132]: i.e. the shining of the face due to the light of sujūd.

[^e133]: i.e. the shining of the parts covered in ablution: the face, hands and feet. The shining marks of ablution on the face, hands and legs of humans is compared to the whiteness of a horse's face and legs.

[^e134]: Aḥmad, with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. Al-Tirmidhī related a part of it and declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_. It is given in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ṣaḥīḥah_.

[^e135]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim; the _ḥadīth_ shows that the sinful from among those regular at prayer, will not remain the Fire forever; in fact, even those given to missing prayers out of laziness will not remain in the Fire forever; this is authentic. For more details, see _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ṣaḥīḥah_ (#2054).

[^e136]: Arabic _al-Ḥaṣīr_: a mat made of date-palm leaves or straw, etc.

[^e137]: This was because his mosque was not covered with mats, etc. This is evident from a great many _aḥādīth_, such as the next one and the one of Abū Saʿīd \mabpwhim later.

[^e138]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^e139]: Aḥmad, al-Sirāj, and al-Bayhaqī, with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e140]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e141]: Ibid. A _khumrah_ is a piece of matting, palm-fiber, or other material which is big enough for a man to place his face on it in _sajdah_; the term does not apply to larger pieces.

[^e142]: Ibid.

[^e143]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah. Arabic _labisa_: usually means “to wear,” but here it is used to mean “to use,” i.e. to sit on; hence “wearing” includes “sitting on,” so this indicates that it is prohibited (_ḥarām_) to sit on silk, because of the prohibition on wearing it established in the _Ṣaḥīḥs_ of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, and others. In fact, a clear forbiddance of sitting on silk is related in these, so do not be confused by the fact that some leading scholars allow it.

[^e144]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e145]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

<!-- Footnote 69: -->

[^e146]: To raise the hands here, and with every _takbīr_, was a view voiced by Aḥmad, as in Ibn al-Qayyim's _Badāiʿ al-Fawāʾid_ (3/89): “Al-Athram quoted from him (Imam Aḥmad) that on being asked about raising the hands, he said: ‘With every movement down and up.’ Al-Athram said: ‘I saw Abū ʿAbd Allāh (i.e. Imam Aḥmad) raising his hands in prayer with every movement down and up.’”

    This was also the opinion of Ibn al-Mundhir and Abū ʿAlī of the Shāfiʿīs, and also a view of Mālik and al-Shāfiʿī themselves, as in _Ṭarḥ al-Tathrīb_. The raising of the hands here is also authentically reported from Anas bin Mālik, Ibn ʿUmar, Nāfiʿ, Tāwūs, Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, Ibn Sīrīn, and Ayyūb al-Sikhtiānī \mabpwthem, as in _Musannaf Ibn Abī Shaybah_ (1/106) with _ṣaḥīḥ_ narrations from them.

[^e146x]: Al-Bukhārī in his \textit{Juz Raf\kern 0.12emʿ al-Yadayn}, Abū Dāwūd with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_, Muslim, and Abū ʿAwānah. It is given in _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (#316).

[^e147]: Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd with a good _isnād_.

[^e148]: Al-Bukhārī and al-Bayhaqī.

[^e149]: Al-Nasāʾī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e150]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, Abū Shaykh in _Mā Rawāhu Abū al-Zubayr ʿan Ghayr Jābīr_ (#104--6), and al-Bayhaqī.

    Ibn al-Qayyim overlooked this; after mentioning the Prophet's \pbuh _iftirāsh_ between the two _sajdahs_, he said, “No other way of sitting here is preserved from him!” How can this be correct, when _iqʿā_ has reached us via the _ḥadīth_ of Ibn ʿAbbās \mabpwthemtwo in Muslim, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_, and others (see _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ṣaḥīḥah_, #383); the _ḥadīth_ of Ibn ʿUmar \mabpwthemtwo with a _ḥasan isnād_ in al-Bayhaqī, declared _ṣaḥīḥ_ by Ibn Ḥajar. Also, Abū Isḥāq al-Ḥarbī related in _Gharīb al-Ḥadīth_ (5/12/1) from Tāwūs, who saw Ibn ʿUmar and Ibn ʿAbbās \mabpwthem practicing _iqʿā_; its _sanad_ is _ṣaḥīḥ_. May Allāh shower His Mercy on Imam Mālik, who said, “Every one of us can refute and be refuted, except the occupant of this grave,” and he pointed to the grave of the Prophet \pbuh. This _sunnah_ was practiced by several Companions, Successors, and others, and I have expanded on this in _al-Aṣl_.

    Of course, this _iqʿā_ is different to the one which is forbidden, and follows under \hyperref[the-first-tashahhud]{\textit{First Tashahhud}}.


[^e151]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.

[^e152]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e153]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e154]: Ibid. Ibn al-Qayyim said, “This _sunnah_ was abandoned by the people after the time of the Companions. But as for the one who abides by the Sunnah, and does not glance sideways towards whatever contradicts it, he is unworried by anything opposing this guidance.”

[^e155]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī, Ibn Mājah and al-Ḥākim, who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e156]: Ibn Mājah with a _ḥasan sanad_. Imam Aḥmad chose to supplicate with this one; Isḥāq bin Rāhawayh said, “If he wishes, he can say this three times, or he can say ‘O Allāh! Forgive me...,’ because both of them have been reported from the Prophet \pbuh between the two _sajdahs_.” (_Masāʾil of Imam Aḥmad and Isḥāq bin Rāhawayh as related by Isḥāq al-Marwazī_, p.\ 19).

[^e157]: This does not negate the validity of the expressions in the obligatory prayers due to the absence of anything to differentiate between those and voluntary prayers. This is the view of al-Shāfiʿī, Aḥmad, and Isḥāq, who held that this was allowed in compulsory and voluntary prayers, as al-Tirmidhī has narrated. Imam al-Ṭaḥāwī has also taken this view in _Mushkil al-Āthār_. Proper analysis supports this argument, for there is no position in prayer where a _dhikr_ is not valid, and so it is fitting that this should be the case here.

[^e158]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e159]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred; the addition is from al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e160]: Abū ʿAwānah and Abū Dāwūd with two _ṣaḥīḥ sanads_. This raising of the hands is supported by Aḥmad, Mālik and al-Shāfiʿī in narrations from them. See the previous note under \hyperref[the-sujux16bd]{\textit{Sujūd}}.

[^e161]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^e162]: Abū Dāwūd, and al-Ḥākim who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_ and al-Dhahabī concurred.

[^e163]: Aḥmad, and al-Tirmidhī who declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.

<!-- TODO Add the translation -->
<!-- أبو عوانة و أبو داود بسندين صحيحين، و قد قال بهذا الرفع أحمد و مالك و الشافعي في رواية عنهما، -->

[^e164]: Abū ʿAwānah and Abū Dāwūd with _ṣaḥīḥ isnāds_. This was also the opinion of Imam Aḥmad as well as Imams Mālik and al-Shāfiʿī with _ṣaḥīḥ sanads_ from them. Also see footnote #69.

[^e165]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd. This sitting is known as _Jalsah al-Istirā\-ḥah_ (the sitting of rest) by the scholars of _fiqh_. Al-Shāfiʿī supported it, as did Aḥmad in _al-Taḥqīq_ (111/1) and favored it more strongly, as is well-known of him that he would insist on following a _sunnah_ which had nothing to contradict it. Ibn Hānī said in his _Masāʾil of Imām Aḥmad_ (p.\ 42), “I saw Abū ʿAbd Allāh (i.e. Imam Aḥmad) sometimes leaning on his hands when standing up for the next _rakʿah_, and sometimes sitting straight and then getting up.” It was also the preference of Imam Isḥāq bin Rāhawayh, who said in _Masāʾil al-Marwazī_ (1/147/2), “The example was set by the Prophet \pbuh of supporting himself with his hands when getting up, whether he was old or young.” See also _Irwā al-Ghalīl_ (2/82--3).

[^e166]: Al-Bukhārī and al-Shāfiʿī.

[^e167]: literally, “as one who kneads dough.”

[^e168]: Abū Isḥāq al-Ḥarbī with a faultless _sanad_, and its meaning is found in al-Bayhaqī with a _ṣaḥīḥ sanad_. As for the _ḥadīth_, “He used to get up like an arrow, not supporting himself with his hands,” it is _mawḍū_ (fabricated), and all narrations of similar meaning are weak, not authentic, and I have explained this in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (#562, #929, #968).


