

[^123]: The three Arabic words _hamz_, _nafkh_, and _nafth_, were interpreted such by the narrator; all three interpretations are also traced back to the Prophet \pbuh with a ṣaḥīḥ mursal isnād. By "poetry" here is meant the vain kind, for the Prophet \pbuh said: "Truly, some poetry is wisdom (Al-Bukhārī)."

[^124]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, al-Dāraquṭnī and Ḥākim who, along with Ibn Ḥibbān and al-Dhahabī, declared it ṣaḥīḥ. It is given along with the next one in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (342).

[^125]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī with a ḥasan isnād. Aḥmad endorsed it (_Masāʾil of Ibn Hāni_, 1/50).

[^126]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Ṭaḥāwī and Aḥmad.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^127]: Abū Dāwūd and Sahmī (64-65); Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (343). Abū ʿAmr al-Dānī transmitted it in _al-Muktafā_ (5/2) and said: "This ḥadīth has many routes, and it is what is depended upon in this regard, and several of the past imāms and reciters preferred to stop at every verse, even if some were connected (in meaning) to the one after." I say: This is a sunnah which has been neglected by the majority of the reciters of this age, let alone others.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^128]: Tammām al-Rāzī in _al-Fawāʾid_, Ibn Abī Dāwūd in _al-Masāhif_ (7/2), Abū Nuʿaym in _Akhbār Isbahān_ (1/104) and Hākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed. Both of these recitations are mutawātir.

[^129]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Bayhaqī. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (302).

[^130]: Al-Dāraquṭnī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ, and Ibn Ḥibbān in his Ṣaḥīḥ. It is also in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (302).

[^131]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^132]: i.e. Sūrah al-Fātiḥah. It is an example of the wording including the whole prayer but intending only a part, as a way of emphasis on that part.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^133]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Mālik, and Sahmī has a supporting ḥadīth of Jābir in _Tārīkh Jurjān_ (144).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^134]: Bājī said: "He is referring to the saying of the Exalted 'And We have bestowed upon you seven of the Oft-Repeated and the Grand Recitation. (Sūrah al-Ḥijr, 15:87).' It is named the 'seven' because it has seven verses, and 'oft-repeated' because it is repeated again and again in prayer. It has been called 'the grand recitation' to specify this name for it, even though every part of the Qurʾān is a grand recitation; similarly, the Kaʿbah is 'the House of Allāh' even though all houses belong to Allāh; this is by way of specifying it and emphasising its importance."

[^135]: Al-Nasāʾī and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^136]: Al-Bukhārī in his article on "Recitation behind the Imām" with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^137]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/80/2), Ḥākim, al-Ṭabarānī and Ibn Ḥibbān who, along with Ḥākim, declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed. It is in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (303).

[^138]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it ḥasan; its isnād is ṣaḥīḥ (_Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_, no. 807).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^139]: _hadhdhan_: reciting quickly, implying racing or hurrying.

[^140]: Al-Bukhārī in his pamphlet, Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad. Al-Tirmidhī and al-Dāraquṭnī declared it ḥasan.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^141]: Mālik, Humaydī, al-Bukhārī in his pamphlet, Abū Dāwūd and Mahāmalī (6/139/1). al-Tirmidhī declared it ḥasan; Abū Hātim al-Rāzī, Ibn Ḥibbān and Ibn Qayyim declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^142]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/97/1), Abū Dāwūd, Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Ruwayānī in his musnad (24/119/1). It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (332, 394).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^143]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/97/1), al-Dāraquṭnī, Ibn Mājah, al-Ṭaḥāwī and Aḥmad from numerous routes, musnad and mursal. Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah declared it strong, as in _al-Furūʿ_ of Ibn ʿAbd al-Hādī (48/2). Būsayrī declared some of its isnāds ṣaḥīḥ. I have discussed it in detail and investigated its routes of narration inthe manuscript version and then in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (no. 500).

[^144]: Ibn Mājah with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (506)

[^145]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Sirāj.

[^146]: Al-Bukhārī in his article, Aḥmad and Sirāj with a ḥasan isnād.

[^147]: Mālik and al-Bukhārī in _Afʿāl al-ʿIbād_ with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

    [NB]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The view of the validity of recitation behind the imām in quiet but not loud prayers was taken by Imām al-Shāfiʿī initially, and by Muḥammad the student of Abū Ḥanīfah in a narration from him which was preferred by Shaykh ʿAlī al-Qārī and other shaykhs of the madhhab; it was also the position of, among others, the Imāms Zuhri, Mālik, Ibn al-Mubārak, Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, several of the muḥaddithīn, and it is the preference of Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->
<!-- TODO make arrangements for appendix 5 -->

[^148]: Al-Tirmidhī and Ibn Mājah with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. Transmitted also by Aajuri in _Ādāb Ḥaml al-Qurʾān_. As for the ḥadīth, "He who recites behind the imaam, his mouth is filled with fire," it is fabricated (mawḍūʿ) and this is explained in _Silsilah al-aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (no. 569)---see Appendix 5.

[^149]: Al-Bukhārī in _Juzʾ al-Qirāʿah_ and Abū Dāwūd with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^150]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Nasāʾī, and Dārimī; the additional wordings are reported by the latter two, and prove that this ḥadīth cannot justify that the imām does not say āmīn, as reported from Mālik; hence, Ibn Ḥajar says in _Fatḥ al-Bārī_, "It clearly shows that the imām says āmīn." Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr says in _al-Tamhīd_ (7/13), "It is the view of the majority of the Muslims, including Mālik as the people of Madīnah report from him, for it is authentic from Allāh's Messenger \pbuh through the aḥādīth of Abū Hurayrah (i.e. this one) and that of Wāʾil ibn Ḥujr (i.e. the previous one)."

[^151]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

<!-- TODO make arrangements for appendix 6 -->

[^152]: Al-Bukhārī in _al-Adab al-Mufrad_, Ibn Mājah, Ibn Khuzaymah, Aḥmad and Sirāj with two ṣaḥīḥ isnāds.

    [NB]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The āmīn of the congregation behind the imām should be done loudly and simultaneously with the imām, not before him as the majority of worshippers do, nor after him. This is what I finally find most convincing, as I have explained in some of my works, among them _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (vol.\ 2, no.\ 952) which has been printed and published by the grace of Allāh, and _Ṣaḥīḥ al-Targhīb wa al-Tarhīb_ (1/205). See Appendix 6.

[^153]: Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād; the other ḥadīth was transmitted by Ibn Abī Dāwūd in _al-Masāhif_ (4/14/2). This and other similar aḥādīth contain permission for infants to enter the mosque. As for the ḥadīth on many lips: "Keep your small children away from your mosques...," it is ḍaʿīf and cannot be used for proof at all; among those who have declared it ḍaʿīf are Ibn al-Jawzī, Mundhirī, Haytamī, Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī and Būsayrī. ʿAbd al-Ḥaqq al-Ishbīli said, "It is baseless."

[^154]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^155]: There are many aḥādīth mentioned further on which prove this.

[^156]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/100/1), Aḥmad and ʿAbd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī in his Sunan (9/2) with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^157]: Ibn Naṣr and al-Ṭaḥāwī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād; I take the meaning of the ḥadīth as: Make every rakʿah have a complete sūrah. The order is one of preference, not compulsion, from the evidence which follows.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^158]: Aḥmad and Abū Yaʿlā from two routes. Also see "Recitation in Fajr prayer."

[^159]: As he did in Fajr, as will follow.

[^160]: Details and sources will follow shortly.

[^161]: i.e. a sūrah after Sūrah al-Fātiḥah.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^162]: Al-Bukhārī as taʿlīq and al-Tirmidhī as mawsūl, and he declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^163]: _nazāʾir_: sūrahs which are similar in meaning, e.g. they both contain advice, commandments, or stories.

[^164]: These are agreed to end at the end of the Qurʾān; the soundest view is that they begin with Sūrah Qāf (no. 50).

[^165]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^166]: The first number is that of the sūrah, while the second is the number of āyāt in the sūrah. By inspecting the first of the two numbers in each case, it is easy to see that in many of these combinations, he \pbuh did not stick to the Qurʾānic order of the sūrahs, so this is evidence for the permissibility of doing this, even though it is better to follow the sequence of the Qurʾān. A similar case is to be found later under "Night prayer."

[^167]: Muslim and al-Ṭaḥāwī.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^168]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. This ḥadīth is general, so it applies to both recitation during prayer, whether voluntary or obligatory, and outside it. Ibn Abī Shaybah (2/132/2) has transmitted from Abū Mūsā al-ʿAsharī and Mughīrah ibn Shubah that they used to say this in obligatory prayers, and from ʿUmar and ʿAlī without such specification.

[^169]: In the original, "the young man said."

[^170]: _dandanah_: when someone speaks some words such that their intonation is audible but they cannot be understood; it is a little bit more than murmuring. (_Nihāyah_)

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^171]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his ṣaḥīḥ (1634) and Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. It has a supporting narration in Abū Dāwūd (no. 758, _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_) and the basic story is in al-Bukhārī and Muslim. The first addition is in one narration of Muslim, the second in Aḥmad (5/74), and the third and fourth in al-Bukhārī. Also under this heading is the ḥadīth on the authority of Ibn ʿAbbās: "that the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh prayed two rakʿahs in which he recited only al-Fātiḥah," transmitted by Aḥmad (1/282), Hārith ibn Abī Usāmah in his _Musnad_ (p.\ 38 of its zawāʾid) and al-Bayhaqī (2/62) with a ḍaʿīf isnād. I used to declare this ḥadīth ḥasan in previous works, until I realised that I had been mistaken, because this ḥadīth depends on Hanzalah al-Dawsī, who is ḍaʿīf, and I do not know how this was unknown to me; maybe I thought he was someone else. Anyway, praise is due to Allāh who guided me to recognise my mistake, and that is why I hurried to correct it in print. Then Allāh compensated me with this better ḥadīth of Muʿādh which relates to what the ḥadīth of Ibn ʿAbbās indicated. Praise be to Allāh by whose Grace good actions are completed.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^172]: There is Ijmāʾ (consensus of opinion) of the Muslims on this, with successors passing it on from the predecessors, along with authentic aḥādīth which establish this, as al-Nawawī has said, and some of them follow. See also _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (345).

[^173]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^174]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^175]: See the sections on his recitation in Friday prayer and the two Eid prayers.

[^176]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^177]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^178]: ʿAbd al-Ḥaqq said in Tahajjud (90/1):

    "As for voluntary prayers during the day, there is nothing authentic from him \pbuh regarding either quiet or loud recitation, but it would seem that he used to recite quietly during them. It is reported from him \pbuh that once, during the daytime, he passed by ʿAbd Allāh ibn Hudhayfah who was praying and reciting loudly, so he said to him: 'O ʿAbd Allāh, let Allāh hear, not us.' But this ḥadīth is not strong."

[^179]: Muslim and al-Bukhārī in _Afʿāl al-ʿIbād_.

[^180]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī in _Shamāʾil_ with a ḥasan isnād. The ḥadīth means that he \pbuh used to moderate between quietness and loudness.

[^181]: Al-Nasāʾī, al-Tirmidhī in _Shamāʾil_ and al-Bayhaqī in _Dalāʾil_ with a ḥasan isnād.

[^182]: Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ, and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^183]: Ibid.

[^184]: The last seventh of the Qurʾān, beginning with Sūrah Qāf according to the soundest view, as before.

[^185]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^186]: Aḥmad, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/69/1) and Ḥākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^187]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^188]: Muslim and al-Tirmidhī. It is given along with the next one in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (345).

[^189]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^190]: Abū Dāwūd and Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. And what is apparent is that he \pbuh did it on purpose to establish its validity.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^191]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/76/1), Ibn Bushrān in _al-Amālī_ and Ibn Abī Shaybah (12/176/1); Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^192]: litreally "the two by means of which refuge is sought," i.e. the last two sūrahs of the Qurʾān, both beginning "Say: I seek refuge..."

[^193]: Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^194]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^195]: Al-Nasāʾī, Aḥmad and Bazzār with a good isnād.

[^196]: Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^197]: Mūsā is mentioned in āyah 45: "Then We sent Mūsā and his brother Hārūn, with our signs and manifest authority." ʿIsā is mentioned soon after in āyah 50: "And We made the son of Maryam and his mother as a sign---we gave them both shelter on high ground, affording rest and security and furnished with springs."

[^198]: Muslim, and al-Bukhārī in taʿlīq form. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (397).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^199]: Aḥmad and Abū Yalā in their musnads, and Maqdisī in _al-Mukhtārah_.

[^200]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^201]: Ibid.

[^202]: Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^203]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^204]: Muslim, Ibn Khuzaymah and Ḥākim.

[^205]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^206]: Ibid.

[^207]: Ibn Mājah and Ibn Khuzaymah.

[^208]: Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Ibn Ḥibbān in his ṣaḥīḥ and Ibn Bushrān; Ibn Ḥajar declared it ḥasan in _al-Aḥādīth al-ʿĀliyāt_ (no. 16).

[^209]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^210]: Muslim, and al-Bukhārī in _Juzʾ al-Qirāʾah_ (Article on Recitation).

[^211]: Abū Dāwūd with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/165/1).

[^212]: Aḥmad and Muslim.

[^213]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/67/2); the latter two declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^214]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his ṣaḥīḥ (1/67/2).

[^215]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^216]: Aḥmad and Muslim. The ḥadīth contains evidence that reciting more than al-Fātiḥah in the last two rakʿahs is a sunnah, and many Companions did so, among them Abū Bakr al-Ṣiddīq. It is also the view of Imām al-Shāfiʿī, whether in Ẓuhr or others, and of our later scholars, Abū al-Ḥasanāt al-Lucknowī took it in _Notes on Muḥammad's al-Muwaṭṭāʾ_ (p.\ 102) and said:

    "Some of our companions take hold a very strange view in obligating a sajdah sahw (prostration for forgetfulness) for the recitation of a sūrah in the last two rakʿahs, but the commentators on _al-Maniyyah_, Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī, Ibn Amīr Ḥājj and others, have refuted this view extremely well. There is no doubt that those who said this were unaware of the ḥadīth, and had it reached them they would not have said so."

[^217]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^218]: Ibn Khuzaymah in his ṣaḥīḥ (1/67/2) and Diyāʾ al-Maqdisī in _al-Mukhtārah_ with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

<!-- TODO get arabic title for the following -->

[^219]: Al-Bukhārī in _Article on Recitation_ and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^220]: Muslim and Tayālisī.

[^221]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^222]: Ibid.

[^223]: Abū Dāwūd with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād and Ibn Khuzaymah.

[^224]: Aḥmad and Muslim.

[^225]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^226]: Ibid.

[^227]: Ibid (Al-Bukhārī and Muslim).

[^228]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^229]: Tayālisī and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^230]: Ibn Khuzaymah (1/166/2), al-Ṭabarānī and Maqdisī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^231]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^232]: Ibid.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^233]: called "al-Tūlayayn": al-Aʿrāf (7) is agreed to be one; al-Anʿām (6) is the other, according to the most correct saying, as in _Fatḥ al-Bārī_.

[^234]: Al-Bukhārī, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/68/1), Aḥmad, Sirāj and Mukhlis.

[^235]: Al-Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al-Kabīr_  with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^236]: Aḥmad, Maqdisī, al-Nasāʾī Ibn Naṣr and al-Ṭabarānī.

[^237]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^238]: Aḥmad and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it ḥasan.

[^239]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim and al-Nasāʾī.

[^240]: Ibid.

[^241]: Ibid. It is also given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (295).

[^242]: Al-Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^243]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^244]: The narration is like this, with al-Nisāʾ before Āl ʿImrān, and thus it is evidence for (the permissibility of) departing from the order of sūrahs found in the ʿUthmānī copy of the Qurʾān in recitation. An example of this has already been seen.

[^245]: Muslim and al-Nasāʾī.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^246]: Abū Yaʿlā and ~Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed. Ibn al-Athīr says: "...the Seven Long sūrahs are al-Baqarah, Āl ʿImrān, al-Nisāʾ, al-Māʾidah, al-Anʿām, al-Aʿrāf and al-Tawbah."

[^247]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^248]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^249]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^250]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^251]: Al-Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^252]: Dārimī and Saʿīd ibn Manṣūr in his sunan with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^253]: Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^254]: Dārimī and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^255]: Arabic _shirrah_: excitement, enthusiasm, keenness, energy. The _shirrah_ of youth is his its beginning and its fervour/zeal. Imām al-Ṭaḥāwī says:

    "This is the zeal/fervour of the Muslims in their actions which bring them nearer to their Lord. However they are bound to fall short and leave some actions (which they began due to this zeal) so the most beloved of their actions to Allāh's Messenger \pbuh were those done otherwise (and kept up), so he ordered them to carry out righteous deeds which they are able to do continually and keep to until they meet their Lord, the Mighty and Majestic. It is narrated from him \pbuh to clarify this that he said: 'The actions most loved by Allāh are those which are the most regular, even if they are little.'"

    I say: this ḥadīth which he prefixes with the words "it is narrated" is ṣaḥīḥ, agreed upon by al-Bukhārī and Muslim from the narration of ʿĀʾishah.

[^256]: Arabic _fatrah_: interval, break, lapse; referring here to a period of reduced enthusiasm.

[^257]: Aḥmad and Ibn Ḥibbān in his ṣaḥīḥ.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^258]: Ibn Sʿad (1/376) and Abū al-Shaykh in _Akhlāq al-Nabī_ (281).

[^259]: Dārimī and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^260]: Ibid.

[^261]: Aḥmad and Ibn Naṣr with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^262]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^263]: Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^264]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd. This ḥadīth and others make it disliked (makrūh) to stay awake the whole night, whether always or regularly, for it is against the example of the Prophet \pbuh; for if staying up the whole night were better, he \pbuh would have done so, and the best guidance is the guidance of Muḥammad. So do not be deceived by what is narrated from Abū Ḥanīfah that he prayed Fajr with the ablution of ʿIshāʾ for forty years! (translator's note: see _Tablighī Nisāb: Virtues of Salāh_ by Mawlānā Zakariyya Kandhalvi for examples of this type of claim) For this narration from him is totally baseless; in fact ʿAllāmah al-Fayrūzʿābādī says in _al-Radd ʿalā al-Mutarid_ (44/1):

    "This narration is a clear lie and cannot be attributed to the Imām, for there is nothing excellent about it, whereas it was the nature of the likes of the Imām to do the better thing; there is no doubt that the renewal of purification for each prayer is more excellent, most complete, and best. This is even if it is correct that he stayed awake the length of the night for forty consecutive years! This story seems more like a fairy tale, and is an invention of some of the extremely ignorant fanatics, who say it about Abū Ḥanīfah and others, and all of it is lies."

[^265]: Al-Nasāʾī, Aḥmad and al-Ṭabarānī (1/187/2); Al-Tirmidhī declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^266]: Al-Nasāʾī, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/70/1), Aḥmad, Ibn Naṣr and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^267]: Aḥmad and al-Bukhārī.

[^268]: Al-Nasāʾī and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^269]: Al-Tirmidhī, Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Asamm in his _al-Ḥadīth_ (vol.\ 2, no.\ 117) and al-Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^270]: Al-Nasāʾī and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^271]: The evidence for these two rakʿahs is found in Saḥīḥ Muslim and others as a practice of the Prophet \pbuh, but they oppose his saying: "Make the last of your prayer at night odd (witr)," transmitted by al-Bukhārī and Muslim. The scholars have differed in reconciling these two ḥadīth, none of them being convincing to me, so the most cautious thing is to leave the two rakahs in compliance with the command of the Prophet \pbuh. Allāh knows best.

    Later I came across an authentic ḥadīth which had a command for two rakʿahs after witr, so the order of the Prophet \pbuh agrees with his action, and the two rakʿahs are validated for everyone; the first command is thus one of recommendation, not negating the two rakʿahs. The latter ḥadīth is given in _Silsilah al-aḥādīth al-Ṣaḥīḥah_ (1993)---see Appendix 7.

[^272]: Aḥmad and Ibn Naṣr and al-Ṭaḥāwī (1/202) and Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Ḥibbān with a ḥasan ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^273]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd. It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (345).

[^274]: Ibid.

[^275]: Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.

[^276]: Ibid.

[^277]: Ibid.

<!-- TODO fix the grammar -->

[^278]: This is the saying of Imām al-Shāfiʿī, Aḥmad and Isḥāq, and some of the later Ḥanafīs who researched, took this view. As for the recitation of a sūrah after it, this is the view of some of the Shāfiʿīs and it is the correct view.

[^279]: Al-Bukhārī, Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī and Ibn al-Jārūd. The addition is not shādh (odd) as Tuwayjirī thinks.

[^280]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Ṭaḥāwī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^c1]: Ibn al-Mubārak in _al-Zuhd_ (162/1 from _al-Kawākib_ 575), Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^c2]: Muslim and Mālik.

[^c3]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^c4]: Al-Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^c5]: Al-Bukhārī in _Afʿāl al-ʿIbād_  with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^c6]: In the section on "Recitation of one verse at a time."

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^c7]: _tarjī_: explained as a vibrating tone by Ibn Ḥajar; Manāwī said: "It arises from a feeling of joy and happiness, which he \pbuh felt a good deal on the day of the conquest of Makkah."

[^c8]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

<!-- TODO double check the following, especially the arabic part -->

[^c9]: Ibid. Ibn Ḥajar said in his commentary on "aaa (| | |)," "this is a hamzah with a fatḥah, followed by a silent alif, followed by another hamzah." Shaykh Alī al-Qārī quoted likewise from others and then said: "It is obvious that this is three prolonged alifs."

[^c10]: Al-Bukhārī as taʿlīq, Abū Dāwūd, Dārimī, al-Ḥākim and Tammām al-Rāzī with two ṣaḥīḥ isnāds.

    [NOTE]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: This ḥadīth was turned round by one of the narrators, who narrated it as "beautify your voices with the Qurʾān". This is a mistake in narration and understanding, and whoever declared it ṣaḥīḥ is submerged in error, for it contradicts the authentic explanatory narrations in this section. In fact, it is a prime example of a maqlūb ḥadīth, and the details of this brief note are in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ḍaʿīfah_ (no.\ 5328).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^c11]: A ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth transmitted by Ibn al-Mubārak in _al-Zuhd_ (162/1 from _al-Kawākib_, 575), Dārimī, Ibn Naṣr, al-Ṭabarānī, Abū Nuʿaym in _Akhbār Isbahān_ and Ḍiyāʾ in _al-Mukhtārah_.

[^c12]: Dārimī and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^c13]: Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^c14]: Mundhirī said, "_taghannā_ does mean to recite in a pleasant voice; Sufyān bin Uyaynah and others took the the view that it is to do with _istighnā_ (i.e. letting the Qurʾān make one dispense with worldly pleasures), but this is rejected."

[^c15]: Al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Ṭaḥāwī and Ibn Mandah in _Tawḥīd_ (81/1).

[^c16]: The scholars have said that musical instruments here means a beautiful voice and that the family of Dāwūd refers to Dāwūd himself; the family of so-and-so can be specifically for so-and-so only; Dāwūd had an extremely beautiful voice. This is mentioned by al-Nawawī in his commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^c17]: ʿAbd al-Razzāq in _al-Amaali_ (2/44/1), al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Ibn Naṣr and Ḥākim.

[^c18]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Ḥibbān, al-Ṭabarānī, Ibn ʿAsākir (2/296/2) and Diyāʾ in _al-Mukhtārah_ with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^c19]: Arabic _tafl_: to blow with a minimum amount of saliva (_Nihāyah_.)

[^c20]: Muslim and Aḥmad. Al-Nawawī says, "This ḥadīth contains a recommendation to seek refuge from the devil when he tempts, along with spitting to the left three times."


