[^d21]: Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d22]: al--Bukhārī and Muslim. This raising of the hands is reported as mutawātir from him \pbuh, as is the raising of the hands on straightening up after rukūʿ. It is the madhhab of the three Imāms Mālik, al--Shāfiʿī and Aḥmad, and of the majority of scholars of ḥadīth and fiqh. Imām Mālik practised it right up to his death, as reported by Ibn ʿAsākir (15/78/2). Some of the Ḥanafīs chose to do it, among them ʿIṣām bin Yūsuf Abū ʿAsamah al--Balkhi (d. 210), a student of Imām Abū Yūsuf, as has been explained in the Introduction. ʿAbd Allāh bin Aḥmad reported from his father in his _Masāʾil_ (p. 60), "It is related from ʿUqbah bin ʿĀmir that he said about a man raising his hands during prayer, 'He earns ten good deeds for each such movement.'" This is supported by the ḥadīth qudsī, "...he who intends a good deed and then does it, Allāh writes it down with Himself as from ten to seven hundred good deeds," transmitted by al--Bukhārī and Muslim. See _Ṣaḥīḥ al--Targhīb_ (no. 16).

[^d23]: Ibid.

[^d24]: Ibid.

[^d25]: Abū Dāwūd and al--Nasāʾī. Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[^d26]: Al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d27]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^d28]: Al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d29]: Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ; al--Dhahabī and Tayālisī agreed. It is given in _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_ (809).

[^d30]: Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Ḥibbān in their ṣaḥīḥs.

[^d31]: Al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ, and Ibn Khuzaymah.

[^d32]: Al--Bukhārī, and Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^d33]: Al--Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al--Kabīr_ and _Muʿjam al--Ṣaghīr_, ʿAbd Allāh b. Aḥmad in _Zawāʾid al--Musnad_ and Ibn Mājah.

[^d34]: Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^d35]: Abū Dāwūd and al--Bukhārī in _Juzʾ al--Qirāʾah_ with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^d36]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d37]: This vision was physically real, and was one of his miracles; it was confined to during prayer: there is no evidence for it being of a general nature.

[^d38]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d39]: Abū Yaʿlā in his Musnad (340/3491/1), Ājuri in _al--Arbaʿīn_, Bayhaqī, al--Ṭabarānī (1/192/1), Diyāʾ in _al--Muntaqā_ (276/1), Ibn ʿAsākir (2/226/2, 414/1, 8/14/1, 76/2) with a ḥasan isnād, and Ibn Khuzaymah declared it ṣaḥīḥ (1/82/1). Ibn Battah has a supporting mursal narration for the first part of the ḥadīth, minus the addition, in _al--Ibānah_ (5/43/1).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->
<!-- check spelling of Haqq -->

[^d40]: Tayālisī, Aḥmad and Ibn Abī Shaybah; it is a ḥasan ḥadīth, as I have explained in my footnotes on _al--Aḥkām_ (1348) by ʿAbd al--Ḥaqq Ishbīlī.

[^d41]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/89/2), al--Ṭabarānī and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[^d42]: Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/89/1), Ibn Mājah and Aḥmad, with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^d43]: Abū ʿAwānah, Abū Dāwūd and Sahmī (61); al--Dāraquṭnī declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^d44]: Aḥmad, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, al--Dāraquṭnī, al--Ṭaḥāwī, Bazzār, and al--Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al--Kabīr_, on the authority of seven Companions. Hence this refutes those who did not accept the specification of the glorifications to three times, such as Ibn al-Qayyim and others.

[^d45]: This can be deduced from the aḥādīth which make it clear that he \pbuh used to make his standing, rukūʿ and sujūd equal in length, as mentioned after this section.

[^d46]: A ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth, transmitted by Abū Dāwūd, al--Dāraquṭnī, Aḥmad, al--Ṭabarānī and Bayhaqī.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d47]: Abū Isḥāq said: _subbūḥ_ means "the one who is free of any defect," while _quddūs_ means "the Blessed" or "the Pure." Ibn Saidah said: Glorified and Blessed are attributes of Allāh, Mighty and
Sublime, because He is glorified and sanctified by others. (_Lisān al--ʿArab_)

[^d48]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d49]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim. "Implementing the Qurʾān" refers to the saying of Allāh: "Then glorify with the Praises of your Lord, and seek His Forgiveness, for He is Oft-Returning. (Sūrah al--Naṣr, 110:3)"

[^d50]: This is an example of use of a general phrase coming after mention of individual items.

[^d51]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Ṭaḥāwī and al--Dāraquṭnī.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d52]: Al--Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

    [Note]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: Is there proof for combining two or more of these adhkār in one rukūʿ, or not ? The scholars have differed about this. Ibn al-Qayyim was uncertain about this in _Zād al--Maʿād_. Al--Nawawī chose the first possibility in _al--Adhkār_, saying, "It is best to combine all of these adhkār if possible, and similarly with the adhkār of other postures." Abū al--Tayyib Siddīq Ḥasan Khān disagreed with him, saying in _Nuzul al--Abrār_ (84), "It is narrated with one of them here, another one there, but I see no evidence for combining. The Messenger of Allāh \pbuh would not combine them in one go, but he would say one of them sometimes, another one sometimes; to follow is better than to start something new." This latter view is the correct one, Allāh willing, but it is proved in the Sunnah to lengthen this posture, as well as others, until it is about the length of the standing: hence, if the worshipper wishes to follow the Prophet \pbuh in this sunnah, the only way is to combine adhkār, as Al--Nawawī said, and as Ibn Naṣr has related it in _Qiyām al--Layl_ (76) from Ibn Jurayj as done by ʿAtāʾ, or to repeat one of the adhkār for which there is text for repetition, and this is closer to the Sunnah. Allāh knows best.

[^d53]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (331).

[^d54]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah. The forbiddance is general, hence covering both obligatory and voluntary prayers. The addition in Ibn ʿAsākir (17/299/1), "as for voluntary prayers, then there is no harm" is either shādh or munkar -- Ibn ʿAsākir pointed out a defect in it -- so it is not permissible to act according to it.

[^d55]: Ibid.

[^d56]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^d57]: Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[^d58]: Al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd; Arabic _faqār_: vertebrae, "the bones making up the spine, from the base of the neck to the coccyx" according to _Qāmūs_; see also _Fatḥ al--Bārī_ (2/308).

[^d59]: Al--Bukhārī and Aḥmad.

[^d60]: Ibid.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^d61]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd.

    [NB]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: This ḥadīth does not prove that those following an imām should not share with the imām in saying: "Allāh listens to the one who praises Him," just as it does not prove that the imām does not share with those following him in saying: "Our Lord, to You be all Praise." This is because the purpose of this ḥadīth is not to set out exactly what the imām and his followers should say in this position; rather, it explains that the followers' _tahmīd_ should be said after the imām's _tasmīʿ_. This is supported by the fact that the Prophet \pbuh used to say the _tahmīd_ when he was the imām, and also because the generality of his saying, "Pray as you have seen me praying," dictates that the follower should say what the imām says, e.g. _tasmīʿ_, etc. Those respected brothers who referred to us in this issue should consider this, and perhaps what we have mentioned is satisfactory. Whoever would like further discussion on this issue should refer to the article by al--Ḥāfiẓ Ṣuyūtī on this matter in his book _al--Hāwī li al--Fatāwī_ (1/529).

[^d62]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim; al--Tirmidhī declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^d63]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim. The raising of the hands here is narrated in a mutawātir way from the Messenger \pbuh, and the majority of scholars have supported it, including some Ḥanafīs. See the previous footnote under Rukū.

[^d64]: Ibid.

[^d65]: Ibid.

[^d66]: Al--Bukhārī and Aḥmad. Ibn al-Qayyim erred on this point in _Zād al--Maʿād_, rejecting the combination of "O Allāh!" with "and," despite the fact that it is found in Ṣaḥīḥ al--Bukhārī, Musnad Aḥmad, in al--Nasāʾī and Aḥmad again via two routes of narration from Abū Hurayrah, in Dārimī as a ḥadīth of Ibn ʿUmar, in Bayhaqī from Abū Saʿīd al--Khudrī, and in al--Nasāʾī again as a ḥadīth of Abū Mūsā al--Ashʿarī.

[^d67]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim; al--Tirmidhī declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[^d68]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d69]: Ibid.

[^d70]: _jadd_: wealth, might, power; i.e. the one who has wealth, sons, might and power in this world will not benefit from them in front of You; his possessions will not save him from You: only righteous deeds will benefit or save anyone.

[^d71]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^d72]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d73]: Abū Dāwūd and al--Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (335).

[^d74]: Mālik, al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[^d75]: Al--Bukhārī, Muslim and Aḥmad. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (no. 307).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->
<!-- TODO check when to use double and single quotes -->

[^d76]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim (first sentence only), Dārimī, Ḥākim, al--Shāfiʿī and Aḥmad. By "bones" here is meant those of the spinal structure, the vertebrae, as has preceded in the main text.

    [NB]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The meaning of this ḥadīth is clear and obvious: to be at ease in this standing. As for the usage of this ḥadīth by our brothers from the Hijāz and elsewhere as evidence to justify placing the right hand on the left in this standing, it is far-removed from the meaning of the multitude of narrations of this ḥadīth. In fact it is a false argument, since the placing mentioned is not referred to with regard to the first standing in any of the narrations or wordings of the ḥadīth; therefore, how can "the bones taking their proper places" mentioned in the ḥadīth be interpreted as referring to the right hand taking hold of the left before rukūʿ?! This would apply if all the versions of the ḥadīth could be construed to mean this, so what about when they imply an obviously different meaning? In fact, this placing of theirs cannot be inferred from the ḥadīth at all, since what is meant by "bones" is the bones of the spine, as confirmed by the Sunnah, "...he would stand straight until every vertebra returned to its place."

    I, for one, am in no doubt that to place the hands on the chest in this standing is an innovation and a leading astray, for it is not mentioned in any of the aḥādīth about prayer, despite their large number. Had this practice any foundation, it would have reached us by at least one narration. Further, not one of the Salaf practised it, nor has a single leading scholar of ḥadīth mentioned it, as far as I know.

    This is not inconsistent with what Shaykh Tuwayjirī has quoted in his article (pp. 18-19) from Imām Aḥmad, "if one wishes, he may leave his hands by his sides, or, if he wishes, he can place them on his chest," for Imām Aḥmad did not attribute this to the Prophet \pbuh, but said it from his own ijtihād and opinion, and opinion can be erroneous. When authentic evidence establishes the innovatory nature of any practice, such as this one, then the saying of an imām in its favour does not negate its being an innovation, as Shaykh al--Islām Ibn Taymiyyah has written. In fact, I see in these words of his, an indication that Imām Aḥmad did not regard the above-mentioned placing as being proved in the Sunnah, for he allowed a choice between practising it and leaving it! -- Does the respected shaykh think that the Imām also allowed a similar choice regarding placing the hands before rukūʿ? Thus, it is proved that the placing of the hands on the chest in the standing after rukūʿ is not part of the Sunnah. This is a brief discussion of this issue, which could be dealt with in more detail and depth, but due to lack of space here, that is done instead in my _Refutation against Shaykh Tuwayjirī_.

[^d77]: Aḥmad and al--Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al--Kabīr_ with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.
