[**78**]: Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**79**] Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**80**] Abu Yaʿlā in his Musnad (284/2) with a good isnād and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/79/2) with a different, ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**81**] Al--Nasāʾī, al--Dāraquṭnī and Mukhlis in _al--Fawāʾ'id_ (1/2/2) with two ṣaḥīḥ isnāds. This raising of the hands has been reported from ten Companions, and a number of the Salaf viewed it as correct, among them Ibn ʿUmar, Ibn ʿAbbās, Ḥasan al--Baṣrī, Tāwūs, his son ʿAbd Allāh, Nāfiʿ the freed slave of Ibn ʿUmar, Sālim the son of Ibn ʿUmar, Qāsim bin Muḥammad, ʿAbd Allāh bin Dīnār and ʿAtāʾ. Also, ʿAbd al--Raḥmān bin Mahdī said, "This is from the Sunnah," it was practised by the Imām of the Sunnah, Aḥmad bin Ḥanbal, and it has been quoted from Mālik and al--Shāfiʿī.

[**82**] Ibn Khuzaymah (1/76/1), al--Dāraquṭnī and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed. All the aḥādīth which contradict this are inauthentic. This way has been endorsed by Mālik, and similar is reported from Aḥmad in Ibn al--Jawzī's _al--Taḥqīq_ (108/2). Also, al--Marwazī quoted with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād, Imām al--Awzāʾī in his _Masāʾil_ (1/147/1) as saying, "I found the people placing their hands before their knees."

[**83**] Abū Dāwūd, Tammām in _al--Fawāʾid_, and al--Nasāʾī in _Sunan al--Ṣughrā_ and _Sunan al--Kubrā_ (47/1) with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. ʿAbd al--Ḥaqq declared it ṣaḥīḥ in _al--Aḥkām_ (54/1), and went on to say in _Kitāb al--Tahajjud_ (56/1), "it has a sounder isnād than the previous one," i.e. the ḥadīth of Wāʾil which is the other way round (knees before hands). In fact, the latter ḥadīth, as well as being contradictory to this ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth and the preceding one, is neither authentic in isnād nor in meaning, as I have explained in _Silsilah al--aḥādīth al--Ḍaʿīfah_ (no. 929) and _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (357).

    It should be known that the way to differ from the camel is to place the hands before the knees, because the camel places its knees first; a camel's "knees" are in its forelegs, as defined in _Lisān al--ʿArab_ and other books of the Arabic language, and as mentioned by al--Ṭaḥāwī in _Mushkil al--Āthār_ and _Sharḥ Maʿānī al--Āthār_. Also, Imām Qāsim al--Saraqustī narrated in _Gharīb al--Ḥadīth_ (2/70/1-2), with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād, Abū Hurayrah's statement, "No one should kneel the way a runaway camel does," and then added, "This is in sajdah. He is saying that one should not throw oneself down, as a runaway (or untamed) camel does, hurriedly and without calmness, but he should go down calmly, placing his hands first, followed by his knees, and an explanatory marfūʿ ḥadīth has been narrated in this regard." He then mentioned the ḥadīth above.

    As for Ibn al-Qayyim's extremely strange statement, "These words are incomprehensible, and not understood by the experts of the language," it is answered by the sources which we have mentioned, and also many others which can be consulted. I have also expanded on this in the refutation against Shaykh Tuwayjarī, which may be published.

[**84**] Ibn Khuzaymah(1/79/2), Aḥmad and Sirāj; Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (313).

[**85**] Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**86**]{#fn85}Ibn Khuzaymah, Bayhaqī and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[**87**] Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/82/2) and Sirāj have related the pointing of the toes in a different narration.

[**88**] Abū Dāwūd and al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ, as did Ibn al--Mulaqqin (27/2); it is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (309).

[**89**] Abū Dāwūd and al--Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**90**] Abū Dāwūd and al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ, as did Ibn al-Mulaqqin (27/2) it is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (309).

[**91**] Abū Dāwūd and Ahmad with ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**92**] Ibn Khuzaymah (1/10/1) with a ḥasan isnād.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[**93**] Al--Dāraquṭnī, al--Ṭabarānī (3/140/1) and Abū Nuʿaym in _Akhbār Isbahān_.

[**94**] Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. Ibn Abī Shaybah (1/82/2) and Sirāj have related the pointing of the toes in a different narration.

[**95**] Al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd. Ibn Saʿd (4/157) related from Ibn ʿUmar that he liked to point whatever of his body he could towards the qiblah when praying, even his thumbs.

[**96**] Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Ibn Khuzaymah (no. 654) and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**97**] Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**98**] Al--Tirmidhī and Sirāj; Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**99**] This movement of the hand was deduced from the grammar of the Arabic text (_Fath al--Bārī_).

[**100**] i.e. to draw them in and prevent them from being scattered, meaning to gather the garment or hair with the hands for rukūʿ and sujūd (_Nihāyah_). This forbiddance is not only during prayer; the majority of scholars include tucking in the hair and garments before prayer in the prohibition. This is further strengthened by his forbidding men to pray with their hair tied, which follows later.

[**101**] Al--Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (310).

[**102**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Ibn Ḥibbān.

[**103**] i.e. tied up or plaited.

[**104**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Ibn Ḥibbān. Ibn al--Athīr says, "The meaning of this ḥadīth is that were his hair loose, it would fall on the ground when in sajdah; hence, the man would be rewarded for the prostration of the hair. However, if the hair is tied, it is effectively as though it did not prostrate, for he compared him to someone whose hands are shackled together, since they would then not lie on the ground in sajdah."

    It would seem that this instruction is limited to men and does not apply to women, as al--Shawkānī has quoted from Ibn al-ʿArabī.

[**105**] Abū Dāwūd and al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ḥasan; Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Ḥibbān declared it ṣaḥīḥ. See _Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd_ (653).

[**106**] Al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd.

[**107**] Al--Bukhārī and Muslim. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (359).

[**108**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Ibn Ḥibbān.

[**109**] Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Mājah with a ḥasan isnād.

[**110**] Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[**111**] Al--Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad.

[**112**] Aḥmad and al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

[**113**] Ibn Khuzaymah (1/80/2), al--Maqdisī in _al--Mukhtārah_ and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**114**] Aḥmad, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, al--Dāraquṭnī, al--Ṭaḥāwī, Bazzār, and al--Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al--Kabīr_ on the authority of seven different Companions. See also the note on this dhikr under "Rukūʿ."

[**115**] See the previous note on this under "Rukūʿ" also.

[**116**] Ṣaḥīḥ, transmitted by Abū Dāwūd, al--Dāraquṭnī, Aḥmad, al--Ṭabarānī and Bayhaqī.

[**117**] Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[**118**] Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**119**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al--Ṭaḥāwī and al--Dāraquṭnī.

[**120**] Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[**121**] Ibn Naṣr, Bazzār and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ but al--Dhahabī disagreed, however, it has a support which is mentioned in the manuscript version.

[**122**] Abū Dāwūd and al--Nasāʾī, with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**123**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al--Nasāʾī and Ibn Naṣr.

[**124**] Ibn Abī Shaybah (62/112/1) and al--Nasāʾī ; Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**125**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Ibn Abī Shaybah (12/106/2, 112/1).

[**126**] Ibid.

[**127**] Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah and Bayhaqī. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (456).

[**128**] Al--Nasāʾī, Ibn ʿAsākir (4/257/1-2) and Ḥākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**129**] Ibn Khuzaymah in his ṣaḥīḥ, with a ḥasan isnād from Ibn Masʿūd (887) and Bayhaqī in mursal form. Ibn Khuzaymah prefixed it with, "Chapter: evidence that gesturing which is understood during prayer neither invalidates nor spoils the prayer" -- this action is one which the People of Opinion have prohibited! In this regard, there are also aḥādīth in al--Bukhārī, Muslim and others.

[**130**] i.e. its colour is pure black, with no other colours mixed with it (_Nihāyah_).

[**131**] The whiteness refers to that part of the horse where chains and bangles are put, including the lower legs but not the knees.

[**132**] i.e. the shining of the face due to the light of sujūd.

[**133**] i.e. the shining of the parts covered in ablution: the face, hands and feet. The shining marks of ablution on the face, hands and legs of humans is compared to the whiteness of a horse's face and legs.

[**134**] Aḥmad, with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād. Al--Tirmidhī related a part of it and declared it ṣaḥīḥ. It is given in _Silsilah al--Aḥādīth al--Ṣaḥīḥah_.

[**135**] Al--Bukhārī and Muslim; the ḥadīth shows that the sinful from among those regular at Prayer, will not remain the Fire forever; in fact, even those given to missing prayers out of laziness will not remain in the Fire forever, this is authentic -- see _Silsilah al--Aḥādīth al--Ṣaḥīḥah_ (2054).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[**136**] Arabic _hasīr_: a mat made of date-palm leaves or straw, etc.

[**137**] This was because his mosque was not covered with mats, etc. This is evident from a great many aḥādīth, such as the next one and the one of Abū Saʿīd later.

[**138**] Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[**139**] Aḥmad, Sirāj and Bayhaqī, with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**140**] Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**141**] Ibid. A _khumrah_ is a piece of matting, palm-fibre, or other material which is big enough for a man to place his face on it in sajdah; the term does not apply to larger pieces.

[**142**] Ibid.

[**143**] Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah. Arabic _labisa_: usually means 'to wear,' but here it is used to mean 'to use,' i.e. to sit on; hence 'wearing' includes 'sitting on,' so this indicates that it is prohibited (ḥarām) to sit on silk, because of the prohibition on wearing it established in the Ṣaḥīḥs of al--Bukhārī and Muslim, and others. In fact, a clear forbiddance of sitting on silk is related in these, so do not be confused by the fact that some leading scholars allow it.

[**144**] Al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**145**] Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**146**] Al--Bukhārī in his _Juzʾ Rafʿ al--Yadayn_, Abū Dāwūd with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād, Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah. It is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ (316).

To raise the hands here, and with every takbeer, was a view voiced by Ahmad, as in Ibn al-Qayyim\'s `` Badaa'i`  ``(3/89): \"Athram quoted from him (Imaam Ahmad) that on being asked about raising the hands, he said: With every movement down and up. Athram said: I saw Abu \`Abdullaah (i.e. Imaam Ahmad) raising his hands in prayer with every movement down and up.\"

This was also the opinion of Ibn al-Mundhir and Abu \`Ali of the Shaafi\`is, and also a view of Maalik and Shaafi\`i themselves, as in `Tarh at-Tathreeb`. The raising of the hands here is also authentically-reported from Anas bin Maalik, Ibn \`Umar, Naafi\`, Taawoos, Hasan Basri, Ibn Seereen and Ayyoob as-Sikhtiaani, as in `Musannaf Ibn Abī  Shaybah` (1/106) with ṣaḥīḥ narrations from them.

[**147**]{#fn146}Ahmad and Abū Dāwūd with a good isnād.

[**148**]{#fn147}al--Bukhārī and Bayhaqī .

[**149**]{#fn148}al--Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**150**]{#fn149}Muslim, Abu \`Awaanah, Abu Shaikh in
`` Maa Rawaahu Abu az-Zubair `an Ghair JaAbīr `` (nos. 104-6) and Bayhaqī
.

[**151**]{#fn150}ibid. Ibn al-Qayyim (rahimahullaah) overlooked this, so
after mentioning the Prophet\'s (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam)
iftiraash between the two sajdahs, he said, \"No other way of sitting
here is preserved from him\" ! How can this be correct, when iq\`aa\'
has reached us via: the ḥadīth of Ibn \`Abbaas in Muslim, Abū Dāwūd and
al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ, and others (see
`Silsilah al-Ahaadeeth as-ṣaḥīḥah` 383); the ḥadīth of Ibn \`Umar with
a hasan isnād in Bayhaqī, declared ṣaḥīḥ by Ibn Hajar. Also, Abu
Ishaaq al-Harbi related in `Ghareeb al-ḥadīth` (5/12/1) from Taawoos,
who saw Ibn \`Umar and Ibn \`Abbaas practising iq\`aa\'; its sanad is
ṣaḥīḥ. May Allaah shower His Mercy on Imaam Maalik, who said, \"Every
one of us can refute and be refuted, except the occupant of this
grave\", and he pointed to the grave of the Prophet (sallallaahu
\`alaihi wa sallam). This sunnah was practised by several Companions,
Successors and others, and I have expanded on this in `al-Asl`.

Of course, this iq\`aa\' is different to the one which is forbidden, and
follows under \"Tashahhud\".

[**152**]{#fn151}Abū Dāwūd and Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[**153**]{#fn152}Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim , who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and
al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**154**]{#fn153}al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**155**]{#fn154}ibid. Ibn al-Qayyim said, \"This sunnah was abandoned
by the people after the time of the Companions. But as for the one who
Abīdes by the Sunnah, and does not glance sideways towards whatever
contradicts it, he is unworried by anything opposing this guidance.\"

[**156**]{#fn155}Abū Dāwūd, al--Tirmidhī, Ibn Maajah and Ḥākim , who
declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed.

[**157**]{#fn156}Ibn Maajah with a hasan sanad. Imaam Ahmad chose to
supplicate with this one; Ishaaq bin Raahawaih said, \"If he wishes, he
can say this three times, or he can say O Allaah! Forgive me ...,
because both of them have been reported from the Prophet (sallallaahu
\`alaihi wa sallam) between the two sajdahs.\"
(`Masaa'il of Imaam Ahmad and Ishaaq bin Raahawaih as related by Ishaaq al-Marwazi,`
p. 19).

[**158**]{#fn157}This does not negate the validity of the expressions in
the obligatory prayers due to the absence of anything to differentiate
between those and voluntary prayers. This is the view of Shaafi\`i,
Ahmad and Ishaaq, who held that this was allowed in compulsory and
voluntary prayers, as al--Tirmidhī has narrated. Imaam Tahaawi has also
taken this view in `Mushkil al-Aathaar`. Proper analysis supports this
argument, for there is no position in prayer where a dhikr is not valid,
and so it is fitting that this should be the case here.

[**159**]{#fn158}al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**160**]{#fn159}Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim , who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and
al--Dhahabī agreed; the addition is from al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**161**]{#fn160}Abu \`Awaanah and Abū Dāwūd with two ṣaḥīḥ sanads.
this raising of the hands has supported by Ahmad, Maalik and Shaafi\`i in
narrations from them. See the previous note under `Sujood`.

[**162**]{#fn161}al--Bukhārī and Muslim.

[**163**Abū Dāwūd and Ḥākim , who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī
agreed.]{#fn162}

[**164**Ahmad and al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.]{#fn163}

[**165**]{#fn164} see the fourth last note.

[**166**]{#fn165}al--Bukhārī and Abū Dāwūd. This sitting is known as
`jalsah al-istiraahah` (the sitting of rest) by the scholars of fiqh.
Shaafi\`i supported it, as did Ahmad in `Tahqeeq` (111/1) and favoured
it more strongly, as is well-known of him that he would insist on
following a sunnah which had nothing to contradict it. Ibn Haani said in
his `Masaa'il of Imaam Ahmad` (p. 42), \"I saw Abu \`Abdullaah (i.e.
Imaam Ahmad) sometimes leaning on his hands when standing up for the
next rak\`ah, and sometimes sitting straight and then getting up.\" It
was also the preference of Imaam Ishaaq bin Raahawaih, who said in
Marwazi\'s `Masaa'il `(1/147/2), \"The example was set by the Prophet
(sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) of supporting himself with his hands
when getting up, whether he was old or young.\" See also
`Irwaa' `(2/82-3).

[**167**]{#fn166}al--Bukhārī and Shaafi\`i .

[**168**]{#fn167}literally, \"as one who kneads dough\".

[**169**]{#fn168}Abu Ishaaq al-Harbi with a faultless sanad, and its
meaning is found in Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad. As for the ḥadīth,
\"He used to get up like an arrow, not supporting himself with his
hands\", it is mawdoo\` (fabricated), and all narrations of similar
meaning are weak, not authentic, and I have explained this in
`` Silsilah al-Ahaadeeth ad-Da`eefah `` (562, 929, 968).


