[**175**Nasaa\'i (1/173) with a saheeh isnaad.]{#fn174}

[**176**]{#fn175}Bukhaari & Abu Daawood.

[**177**]{#fn176}Abu Daawood & Baihaqi with a good sanad.

[**178**]{#fn177}Tayaalisi, Ahmad & Ibn Abi Shaibah. About iq\`aa\', Abu
\`Ubaidah and others said, \"It is when a man presses his buttocks
against the ground, keeps his shins upright, and leans his hands on the
ground, the way a dog does.\" This is different to the iq\`aa\' between
sajdahs, which is approved in the Sunnah, as covered previously.

[**179**]{#fn178}Muslim, Abu \`Awaanah & others. It is given in
`Irwaa' `(316).

[**180**]{#fn179}Muslim & Abu \`Awaanah.

[**181**]{#fn180}Abu Daawood & Nasaa\'i with a saheeh sanad. It is as
though the meaning is that he would not separate his elbows from his
side, as Ibn al-Qayyim has elucidated in `` Zaad al-Ma`aad ``.

[**182**]{#fn181}Baihaqi & Haakim , who declared it saheeh and Dhahabi
agreed. It is given, as well as the next one, in Irwaa\' (380).

[**183**]{#fn182}Ahmad & Abu Daawood with a good isnaad.

[**184**]{#fn183}\`Abdur Razzaaq; \`Abdul Haqq declared it saheeh in his
`Ahkaam` (no. 1284 - with my checking).

[**185**]{#fn184}Muslim, Abu \`Awaanah & Ibn Khuzaimah. Humaidi (13/1)
and Abu Ya\`laa (275/2) added with a saheeh sanad on the authority of
Ibn \`Umar: \"and this is the shooting of the devil; no-one will forget
when he does this\", and Humaidi raised his finger. Humaidi also said
that Muslim bin Abi Maryam said, \"A man related to me that in a church
in Syria, he saw images of Prophets depicted like this\", and Humaidi
raised his finger. This is an extremely strange remark, but its sanad up
to \"the man\" is saheeh.

[**186**]{#fn185}Muslim & Abu \`Awaanah.

[**187**]{#fn186}Abu Daawood, Nasaa\'i, Ibn al-Jaarood in `al-Muntaqaa`
(208), Ibn Khuzaimah (1/86/1-2) & Ibn Hibbaan in his Saheeh (485) with a
saheeh sanad. Ibn al-Mulaqqin also declared it saheeh (28/2), and it has
a supporting narration in Ibn \`Adi (287/1).

[**188**]{#fn187}ibid. About \"supplicating with it\", Imaam Tahaawi
said, \"This is evidence that it was at the end of the prayer.\" Hence,
there is evidence in this that the Sunnah is to continue pointing and
moving the finger until the tasleem, for the supplication is until then.
This is the view of Maalik and others. Imaam Ahmad was asked, \"Should a
man point with his finger during prayer?\" He replied, \"Yes,
vigorously.\" (Mentioned by Ibn Haani in his `Masaa'il of Imaam Ahmad`,
1/80). From this, it is clear that moving the finger in tashahhud is a
proven sunnah of the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam), and it
was practised by Ahmad and other imaams of the Sunnah. Therefore, those
who think that it is pointless and irrelevant and has nothing to do with
the Prayer, should fear Allaah, since because of this, they do not move
their fingers although they know it to be an established sunnah; and
they take great pains to interpret it in a way which is inconsistent
with the \`Arabic way of expression and contrary to the understanding of
the imaams with regard to it.

The amazing thing is that some of them will defend an imaam on other
issues, even if his opinion conflicts with the Sunnah, with the argument
that to point out the imaam\'s mistakes inevitably means to taunt and
disrespect him. They then forget this and reject this established
sunnah, at the same time mocking at those who practise it. Whether or
not they realise it, their mockery also includes those imaams whom they
often defend wrongly, and who are correct about the Sunnah this time! In
fact, they are deriding the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam)
himself, for he is the one who brought us this sunnah, and so jeering at
it is equivalent to jeering at him. &lt;&lt; **But what is the reward
for those among you who behave like this except** ... &gt;&gt;

As for putting the finger down after pointing, or limiting the movement
to the affirmation (saying `laa ilaaha`: \'there is no god ...\') and
negation (saying: `illallaahu`: \'... except Allaah\'), all of that has
no basis in the Sunnah; in fact, it is contrary to the Sunnah, as this
hadeeth proves.

Further, the hadeeth that he would not move his finger does not have an
authentic isnaad, as I have explained in `` Da`eef Abi  Daawood ``
(175). Even if it were authentic, it is negatory, while the hadeeth
above is affirmatory: the affirmatory takes precedence over the
negatory, as is well-known among the scholars.

[**189**]{#fn188}Ahmad, Bazzaar, Abu Ja\`far al-Bukhteeri in `al-Amaali`
(60/1), \`Abdul Ghani al-Maqdisi in his Sunan (12/2) with a hasan sanad,
Rooyaani in his Musnad (249/2) & Baihaqi .

[**190**]{#fn189}Ibn Abi Shaibah (2/123/2) with a hasan sanad.

[**191**]{#fn190}Ibn Abi Shaibah (12/40/1, 2/123/2) & Nasaa\'i . Haakim
declared it saheeh and Dhahabi agreed, and there is a supporting
narration for it in Ibn Abi Shaibah.

[**192**]{#fn191}Nasaa\'i & Baihaqi with a saheeh sanad.

[**193**]{#fn192}Muslim & Abu \`Awaanah.

[**194**]{#fn193}Baihaqi transmitted it as a narration from \`Aa\'ishah
with a good isnaad, as verified by Ibn al-Mulaqqin (28/2).

[**195**]{#fn194}Bukhaari & Muslim. It is given in
`Irwaa'       al-Ghaleel` (338).

[**196**]{#fn195}Nasaa\'i, Ahmad & Tabaraani in
`` Mu`jam       al-Kabeer `` (3/25/1) with a saheeh sanad. The literal
meaning of the hadeeth is evidence for the validity of supplication in
every tashahhud, even the one not adjacent to the tasleem, and this is
the view of Ibn Hazm (rahimahullaah).

[**197**]{#fn196}Nasaa\'i with a saheeh sanad.

[**198**]{#fn197}Bukhaari & Muslim.

[**199**]{#fn198}Abu Daawood & Haakim , who declared it saheeh and
Dhahabi agreed.

[**200**]{#fn199}Ar. `tahiyyaat`, i.e. \"all words which imply peace,
sovereignty and eternity, are due to Allaah.\" (`Nihaayah`)

[**201**]{#fn200}Ar. `salawaat`, i.e. \"all supplications which are used
to glorigy the majesty of Allaah, for He is fully entitled to them, and
none but Him is worthy of them.\" (`Nihaayah`)

[**202**]{#fn201}Ar. `tayyibaat`, i.e. \"all good and pure words
suitable for praising Allaah, not those ones incompatible with his
attributes with which kings were greeted.\" (`Fath al-Baari`)

[**203**]{#fn202}meaning seeking of refuge with Allaah and being
strengthened by him, since `as-Salaam` (Peace) is actually a name of
Allaah. Hence, the greeting effectively means: Allaah be a watcher and
safeguard over you. Similarly, it is said, \"Allaah be with you\", i.e.
in His safeguarding, help and favour.

[**204**]{#fn203}A term for all the good continuously emanating from
Allaah.

[**205**]{#fn204}Bukhaari, Muslim, Ibn Abi Shaibah (1/90/2), Siraaj &
Abu Ya\`laa in his Musnad (258/2). It is given in `Irwaa'` (321).

Ibn Mas\`ood\'s statement, \"We said: Peace be on the Prophet\"
clarifies that the Companions (radi Allaahu \`anhum) used to say,
\"Peace be on you, O Prophet\" in tashahhud while the Prophet
(sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) was alive, but when he died, they
ceased to do that, instead saying, \"Peace be on the Prophet\".
Undoubtedly, this was with the endorsement of the Prophet (sallallaahu
\`alaihi wa sallam); this is supported by the fact that \`Aa\'ishah
(radi Allaahu \`anhaa) would similarly teach the tashahhud in prayer
with \"Peace be on the Prophet\", as transmitted by Siraaj in his Musnad
(9/1/2) & Mukhlis in `al-Fawaa'id` (11/54/1) with two saheeh isnaads
from her.

Ibn Hajar says, \"This addition shows clearly that they used to say
\'Peace be on you, O Prophet\', addressing him directly during his life,
but when the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) died, they stopped
addressing him and mentioned him in the third person instead, saying
\'Peace be on the Prophet\'.\" He also says in a different place,
\"Subki said in `Sharh al-Minhaaj`, after mentioning this narration from
Abu \`Awaanah only, \'If this is authentically-reported from the
Companions, it proves that after his time, it is not compulsory to
address the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) directly in the
greeting of peace, so one says: Peace be on the Prophet.\' (Ibn Hajar
continues:) This is authentic without doubt (i.e. because it is
established in Sahih al-Bukhaari ), and I have also found strong support
for it:- \`Abdur Razzaaq said: Ibn Juraij informed me: \`Ataa\' informed
me that the Companions used to say \'Peace be on you, O Prophet\' while
the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) was alive, but after he
died, they would say \'Peace be on the Prophet\', and this is a saheeh
isnaad. As for Sa\`eed bin Mansoor\'s narration from Abu \`Ubaidah bin
\`Abdullaah bin Mas\`ood, who reported from his father that the Prophet
(sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) taught them the tashahhud, and then he
(\`Abdullaah bin Mas\`ood) said it (the tashahhud); Ibn \`Abbaas said:
We used to say \'Peace be on you, O Prophet\' only while he was alive,
to which Ibn Mas\`ood replied, \'This is how we were taught, and this is
how we teach it\', it would appear that Ibn \`Abbaas said this as a
matter of discussion but Ibn Mas\`ood did not accept. However, the
narration of Abu Ma\`mar (i.e. the narration of Bukhaari ) is more
authentic, since Abu \`Ubaidah did not hear (ahaadeeth) from his father,
and furthermore, the isnaad up to Abu \`Ubaidah is weak.\" (End of quote
from Ibn Hajar)

These words of Ibn Hajar have been quoted by several scholars in their
analysis, e.g. Qastalaani, Zarqaani, Lucknowi, etc. They all chose to
give his words without commenting further. This discussion is treated
more fully in `al-Asl`.

[**206**]{#fn205}Muslim, Abu \`Awaanah, Shaafi\`i & Nasaa\'i .

[**207**]{#fn206}see next note.

[**208**]{#fn207}These two additions have been proved to be part of the
tashahhud from the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam). Ibn \`Umar
did not add them of his own accord (far is he above such a thing! ); in
fact, he learnt them from other Companions who reported them from the
Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam), and he then added them to the
tashahhud which he heard from the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa
sallam) directly.

[**209**]{#fn208}Abu Daawood & Daaraqutni, who declared it saheeh.

[**210**Muslim, Abu \`Awaanah, Abu Daawood & Ibn Maajah.]{#fn209}

[**211**]{#fn210}Maalik & Baihaqi with saheeh isnaads. Although this
hadeeth is `mawqoof`, it is effectively `` marfoo` ``, for it is known
that this sort of thing is not said from personal opinion, since it were
so, it would be no better than any other sayings of `dhikr`, as Ibn
\`Abdul Barr has said.

**\*NB:** In none of the types of tashahhud is there the addition:
`wa       maghfiratuhu` (... \"and His forgiveness\"), so one should not
be accustomed to it. Hence some of the Salaf rebuked it, as the
following narrations show:

Tabaraani (3/56/1) reported with a saheeh isnaad from Talhah bin
Musarrif, who said: Rabee\` bin Khaitham added during tashahhud, \"...
and His blessings, `and His forgiveness`\"! So \`Alqamah said, \"We stop
where we were taught: Peace be upon you, O Prophet, and also the mercy
of Allaah and His blessings\"; \`Alqamah was actually following the
example of his teacher \`Abdullaah bin Mas\`ood (radi Allaahu \`anhu),
from whom it is authentically-reported that he was teaching a man the
tashahhud: when he got to \"I bear witness that there is no (true) god
except Allaah ...\", the man said: \"alone, He has no partner\", to
which \`Abdullaah said, \"He is so, but we stop at where we were
taught.\" (Transmitted by Tabaraani in `` Mu`jam       al-Awsat ``, no.
2848, with a saheeh isnaad.)

[**212**]{#fn211}Abu \`Awaanah in his Saheeh (2/324) & Nasaa\'i .

[**213**]{#fn212}They had said, \"O Messenger of Allaah, we have been
taught how to send peace on you (i.e. in tashahhud), but how do we send
prayers on you? He said, \"Say: O Allaah! send prayers on Muhammad ...\"
etc. Thus he did not specify one tashahhud to the exclusion of another,
so there is evidence here to establish sending prayers on him in the
first tashahhud also. This is the way of Imaam Shaafi\`i, as in the text
of his book `al-Umm`, and it is held to be correct by his companions, as
Nawawi has explained in `` al-Majmoo` `` (3/460) and supported in
`Rawdah Taalibeen` (1/263). It is also the view of Wazeer bin Hubairah
al-Hanbali in al-Ifsaah, as Ibn Rajab ha quoted and strongly supported
in `Dhail Tabaqaat` (1/280). Many ahaadeeth exist about sending prayers
on him (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) in tashahhud; in none of them is
there any such specification mentioned. In fact, these ahaadeeth are
general, hence including every tashahhud, and I have given them in
al-Asl as ta\`leeq, but not in the main text, for they do not satisfy
our conditions for authenticity. However, they do support each other in
meaning, and those who reject and oppose this have no authentic evidence
to use as proof, as I have detailed in `al-Asl.` Similarly, to say that
adding anything to \"O Allaah! send prayers on Muhammad\" is makrooh has
no basis in the Sunnah, nor is there any convincing proof for it. In
fact, we see that whoever says this does not implement the previous
instruction of the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam), \"Say: O
Allaah! send prayers on Muhammad, and on the family of Muhammad ...\" ;
there is more to this discussion in `al-Asl`.

[**214**]{#fn213}One of the earliest views about the meaning of
\"sending prayers on the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam)\" is
that of Abu al-\`Aaliyah (with reference to Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:56),
\"Allaah\'s sending prayers on his Prophet means His exalting him and
raising his rank; the angels\' and others\' sending prayers means their
seeking this from Allaah, and here it is meant asking the prayers to be
increased, not asking for the original prayer in itself.\" Ibn Hajar
quoted this in `Fath al-Baari`, and went on to refute the widespread
notion that the Lord\'s prayer on someone is His Mercy; Ibn al-Qayyim
also clarified this in `Jalaa' al-Afhaam`, leaving little scope for
further comment.

[**215**]{#fn214}from `barakah`: growth, increase. Hence this
supplication secures for Muhammad the good which Allaah granted to the
family of Ibraaheem, continual, established good, as well as its
multiplying and increase.

[**216**]{#fn215}Ahmad & Tahaawi with a saheeh sanad.

[**217**]{#fn216}see next note.

[**218**]{#fn217}These two additions are conclusively found in Bukhaari,
Tahaawi, Baihaqi, Ahmad & Nasaa\'i . They also exist via different
routes of narration in other types of this supplication (see nos. 3,7),
and so do not be confused by Ibn al-Qayyim\'s view in
`Jalaa'       al-Afhaam` (p. 198), following in the footsteps of his
great teacher Ibn Taymiyyah in `al-Fataawaa` (1/16), \"There is no
authentic hadeeth with the phrases \'Ibraaheem\' and \'the family of
Ibraaheem\' together\"; here, we have shown you such authentic
ahaadeeth. Ibn al-Qayyim\'s error is further established by the fact
that he himself declared no. 7 saheeh, which contains what he denied
above!

[**219**]{#fn218}Bukhaari, Muslim, Humaidi (138/1) & Ibn Mandah (68/2),
who said, \"There is consensus on this hadeeth being authentic.\"

[**220**]{#fn219}Ahmad, Nasaa\'i & Abu Ya\`laa in his Musnad (44/2) with
a saheeh sanad.

[**221**]{#fn220}Muslim, Abu \`Awaanah, Ibn Abi Shaibah (2/132/1) & Abu
Daawood; Haakim declared it saheeh.

[**222**]{#fn221}Bukhaari, Nasaa\'i, Tahaawi, Ahmad & Ismaa\`eel
al-Qaadi in
`` Fadl as-Salaah `alaa Nabi sallallaahu `alaihi wa sallam `` (p. 28 1st
ed., p. 62 2nd ed. with my checking).

[**223**]{#fn222}Bukhaari, Muslim & Nasaa\'i.

[**224**]{#fn223}Nasaa\'i, Tahaawi, Abu Sa\`eed bin al-\`Arabi in
`` al-Mu`jam `` (79/2) with a saheeh sanad. Ibn al-Qayyim gave its
source as Muhammad bin Ishaaq as-Siraaj in `Jalaa' al-Afhaam `(pp.
14-15) and then declared it saheeh. This wording includes both
\'Ibraaheem\' and \'the family of Ibraaheem\', something overlooked by
both Ibn al-Qayyim & his teacher Ibn Taymiyyah, as explained above.

[**225**]{#fn224} Abu Daawood & Ahmad with a saheeh isnaad.

[**226**]{#fn225} a famous grammarian and scholar of the \`Arabic
language of the second century AH.

[**227**]{#fn226}which is preserved in the Zaahiriyyah Library in
Damascus.

[**228**]{#fn227} Nasaa\'i, Ahmad & Tabaraani with various isnaads from
Ibn Mas\`ood - the details are given in `as-Saheehah `(878) - and there
is a supporting hadeeth of Ibn az-Zubair in `` Majma` az-Zawaa'id ``
(2/142).

[**229**]{#fn228}Bukhaari & Muslim.

[**230**]{#fn229}Abu Ya\`laa in his Musnad (284/2) with a good isnaad.
It is given in `Silsilah al-Ahaadeeth as-Saheehah` (604).

[**231**]{#fn230}Bukhaari & Abu Daawood.

[**232**ibid.]{#fn231}

[**233**]{#fn232}Abu \`Awaanah & Nasaa\'i with a saheeh sanad.

[**234**]{#fn233}literally, \"as one who kneads dough.\"

[**235**]{#fn234}Harbi in `Ghareeb al-Hadeeth`; its meaning is found in
Bukhaari and Abu Daawood. As for the hadeeth, he forbade that a man
should support himself with his hand when getting up during prayer\", it
is `munkar` and not authentic, as I have explained in
`` Silsilah       al-Ahaadeeth ad-Da`eefah `` (967).

[**236**`Qunoot`: carries several meanings, e.g. humility, devotion.
What is meant here is the special supplication while standing during
prayer.]{#fn235}

[**237**Bukhaari & Ahmad.]{#fn236}

[**238**]{#fn237}ibid.

[**239**]{#fn238}Ahmad & Tabaraani with a saheeh sanad. To raise the
hands in qunoot is the madhhab of Ahmad and also Ishaaq bin Raahawaih,
cf. Marwazi\'s `Masaa'il` (p. 23). As for wiping the face with the
hands, it is not reported in this position, and is thus an innovation;
as for outside of prayer, it is not authentically-reported: all that has
been transmitted in this regard is either weak or very weak, as I have
shown in `` Da`eef Abi       Daawood `` (262) &
`Silsilah al-Ahaadeeth as-Saheehah` (597). This is why \`Izz bin \`Abd
as-Salaam said in one of his fatwas, \"Only an ignorant person does
it.\" See Appendix 8.

[**240**Abu Daawood & Siraaj ; Haakim declared it saheeh, and Dhahabi &
others agreed.]{#fn239}

[**241**]{#fn240}Abu Daawood, Siraaj & Daaraqutni with two hasan sanads.

[**242**]{#fn241}Ibn Khuzaimah in his Saheeh (1/78/2) & Khateeb in
`Kitaab al-Qunoot` with a saheeh sanad.

[**243**]{#fn242}Bukhaari & Ahmad; the addition is in Muslim.

[**244**]{#fn243}Nasaa\'i, Ahmad, Siraaj (109/1) & Abu Ya\`laa in his
Musnad with a good sanad.

[**245**]{#fn244}Ibn Nasr & Daaraqutni with a saheeh sanad.

[**246**]{#fn245}We have said, \"... sometimes\" because the Companions
who narrated the Witr prayer did not mention the qunoot in it, whereas
had the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) done so always, they
would have all mentioned it. However, Ubayy ibn Ka\`b alone narrated the
qunoot in Witr, so this shows that he used to do it sometimes. Hence,
this is evidence that qunoot in Witr is not obligatory (waajib), and
this is the opinion of the majority of scholars. For this reason, the
researching Hanafi scholar, Ibn al-Humaam, recognised in
`Fath al-Qadeer` (1/306,359,360) that the view of it being obligatory is
feeble and not substantiated by evidence. This shows his fairness and
lack of party-spirit, for this view which he has supported is contrary
to his madhhab !

[**247**]{#fn246}Ibn Abi Shaibah (12/41/1), Abu Daawood, Nasaa\'i in
`Sunan al-Kubraa` (218/1-2), Ahmad, Tabaraani, Baihaqi & Ibn \`Asaakir
(4/244/2) narrated this, along with the supplication after it, with a
`saheeh` sanad. Ibn Mandah narrated the supplication only in `Tawheed`
(70/2) with a different, hasan sanad. Its `takhreej` is also given in
`Irwaa'` (426).

[**248**Ibn Khuzaimah (1/119/2) & also Ibn Abi Shaibah etc., as for the
last hadeeth.]{#fn247}

**\*NB:** Nasaa\'i adds at the end of the qunoot:
`` wa sall-Allaahu       `ala-n-Nabiyy al-Ummiyy  ``(\"may Allaah send
prayers on the Unlettered Prophet\"), related with a weak isnaad; among
those who declared it da\`eef are Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaani & Zurqaani.
Therefore, we have not included it in our system of combining acceptable
narrations. \`Izz bin \`Abd as-Salaam said in `al-Fataawaa` (66/1,1962),
\"To send prayers on the Messenger of Allaah (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa
sallam) in qunoot is not authentic, nor is it fitting to add to the
Messenger of Allaah (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam)\'s prayer in any
way.\" This view of his shows that he did not widen the argument by
including the idea of bid\`ah hasanah (\"good\" innovation), as some of
the later scholars are prone to doing !

However, it is proved in the hadeeth about Ubayy bin Ka\`b leading the
people during the Ramadaan night prayers that he used to send prayers on
the Prophet (sallallaahu \`alaihi wa sallam) at the end of the qunoot,
and that was during the reign of \`Umar (radi Allaahu \`anhu) -
transmitted by Ibn Khuzaimah in his Saheeh (1097). Similarly is proved
from Abu Haleemah Mu\`aadh al-Ansaari, who also used to lead them during
\`Umar\'s rule - transmitted by Ismaa\`eel al-Qaadi (no. 107) & others,
so this addition is justified by the practice of the Salaf, and it is
thus not fitting to categorically state that this addition is an
innovation. Allaah knows best.


