

[^h249]: Al-Bukhārī.

[^h250]: Ibid. As for two-rakʿah prayers such as Fajr, the Sunnah is to sit muftarishan. This difference in detail is documented from Imām Aḥmad, cf. Ibn Hānī's _Masāʾil al-Imām Aḥmad_ (p.\ 79).

[^h251]: Abū Dāwūd and al-Bayhaqī with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad.

[^h252]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^h253]: Ibid.

[^h254]: Ibid.

<!-- TODO double check the following, Ajuri-->

[^h255]: Aḥmad, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/83/2) and al-Ḥākim , who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

    It should be known that this ḥadīth proves that ṣalāh (sending prayers) on the Prophet \pbuh in this tashahhud is obligatory, due to the command about it. This opinion was taken by Imām al-Shāfiʿī and by Imām Aḥmad in the later of the two narrations from him, and before them by several Companions, as well as other people of knowledge. Because of this, Ājūrī said in _Sharīʿah_ (p.\ 415): "He who does not send prayers on the Prophet \pbuh in the final tashahhud must repeat the prayer." Hence, those who label Imām al-Shāfiʿī as being alone and odd in his opinion on this, are not being just, as the faqīh Haytamī has explained in _Darr al-Mandūd_ (sections 13--16).

[^h256]: Al-Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad.

[^h257]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, al-Nasāʾī and Ibn al-Jārūd in _al-Muntaqā_ (27). It is given in _Irwāʾ al-Ghalīl_ (350).

[^h258]: Abū Dāwūd and Aḥmad with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad.

[^h259]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.

[^h260]: We have not said, "...in his tashahhud" because the text is "...in his prayer," not specifying either tashahhud or anything else. Hence, it covers all positions suitable for supplication, e.g. prostration and tashahhud; the instruction to supplicate in these two postures has been mentioned.

[^h261]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim. Athram said, "I asked Aḥmad: 'With what (words) should I supplicate after tashahhud?' He said, 'As has been narrated.' I said, 'Didn't the Messenger of Allāh \pbuh say, "Then he should select whichever supplication he likes"?' He said, 'He should select out of what has been narrated.' I repeated the question: he said, 'From what has been narrated.'" This was quoted by Ibn Taymiyyah (_Majmūʿ al-Fatāwā_ 69/218/1), who endorsed it, adding, "Hence, 'whichever supplication' refers to the supplications which Allāh loves, not to any supplication...;" later he said, "Hence, it is best to say: (one should supplicate) with the approved, established supplications, and these are what have ben narrated and those that are beneficial." This is so, but to recognise which supplications are indeed beneficial depends on authentic knowledge, and this is rarely found among the people, so it is best to stick to the supplications quoted, especially when they include what the worshipper wishes to request. Allāh knows best.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^h262]: _maʿtham_: what causes a man to sin, or the sin itself.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^h263]: _maghram_: burden; here it means debt, as proved by the rest of the ḥadīth, in which ʿĀʾishah said, "Someone said to him, 'Why do you seek refuge from maghram, so often, O Messenger of Allāh?' He replied, 'Truly, when a man becomes indebted, he speaks and lies, and he promises and breaks his promise.'"

[^h264]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

[^h265]: i.e. from the evil of the bad actions I have done, and from the evil of not doing good actions.

[^h266]: Al-Nasāʾī with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad and Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim in his _al-Sunnah_ (no. 370---with my checking); the addition is from the latter.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^h267]: Aḥmad and al-Ḥākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^h268]: Al-Nasāʾī and al-Ḥākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī  agreed.

[^h269]: Al-Bukhārī and Muslim.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^h270]: Aḥmad, Tayālīsī, al-Bukhārī in _al-Adab al-Mufrad_, Ibn Mājah and al-Ḥākim who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed. I have given its takhrīj in _Silsilah al-Aḥādīth al-Ṣaḥīḥah_ (1542).

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^h271]: _dandanah_: to speak such the intonation is audible, but the words are incomprehensible---in the case, the quiet words of supplication. The final statement means, "Our words are like yours."

[^h272]: Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/87/1) with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād.

[^h273]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī, Aḥmad and Ibn Khuzaymah; Al-Ḥākim declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al-Dhahabī agreed.

[^h274]: This is tawassul (a seeking of approach) to Allāh through His most beautiful names and attributes, and this is what Allāh the Exalted commands: "To Allāh belong the most beautiful names, so call on Him by them." (Sūrah al-Aʿrāf, 7:180). As for seeking to approaching Allāh through other things, e.g. for so-and-so's sake, or by so-and-so's right, status, dignity, etc. there is text from Imām Abū Ḥanīfah and his companions that such a practice is at least disliked (makrūh); in general it is prohibited (ḥarām). Therefore, it is a pity that one sees most of the people, among them many shaykhs, totally neglecting the approved tawassul---you will never hear them approaching Allāh this way---but they are well-versed in innovated forms of tawassul, which are at the very least debatable, as though no other way is allowed! Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah has composed an extremely good essay on this subject entitled _Tawassul wa Wasīlah_ ("Approaching Allāh, and the Means of doing so"), which should be consulted, for it is very important, and there is little to compare with it in its coverage. There is also my article _Tawassul---its types and its rulings_, which is also important in its subject-matter and format, and also refutes some of the latest misconceptions advanced by contemporary doctors of religion. May Allāh guide us and them.

[^h275]: Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasāʾī, Aḥmad, al-Bukhārī in _al-Adab al-Mufrad_, al-Ṭabarānī and Ibn Mandah in _Tawḥīd_ (44/2, 67/1, 70/1--2) with ṣaḥīḥ isnāds.

[^h276]: Muslim and Abū ʿAwānah.


