

[^i277]: Abū Dāwūd, al--Nasāʾī and al--Tirmidhī, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^i278]: Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/87/2) with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad. ʿAbd al--Ḥaqq also declared it ṣaḥīḥ in his _Aḥkām_ (56/2), as did al--Nawawī and Ibn Ḥajar. It was also transmitted via another route by ʿAbd al--Razzāq in his _Musannaf_ (2/219), Abū Yaʿlā in his _Musnad_ (3/1253), al--Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al--Kabīr_ (3/67/2) and _Muʿjam al--Awsaṭ_ (no. 4476 -- my numbering) and al--Dāraquṭnī.

[^i279]: Al--Nasāʾī, Aḥmad and Sirāj with a ṣaḥīḥ sanad.

<!-- TODO double check the following -->

[^i280]: Ibn Khuzaymah, Bayhaqī, Ḍiyāʾ in _al--Mukhtārah_ and ʿAbd al--Ghani al--Maqdisī in his _Sunan_ (243/1) with a ṣaḥīḥ isnād; Aḥmad, al--Ṭabarānī in _Muʿjam al--Awsaṭ_ (32/2), Bayhaqī, Ibn al--Mulaqqīn (29/1) and al--Hākim, who declared it ṣaḥīḥ and al--Dhahabī agreed. Its takhrīj is given in _Irwāʾ al--Ghalīl_ under ḥadīth no. 327.

[^i281]: Muslim, Abū ʿAwānah, Sirāj, Ibn Khuzaymah and al--Ṭabarānī.

    [NB]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}: The ʿIbāḍiyyah have distorted this ḥadīth: their scholar Rabīʿ has related it in his unreliable _Musnad_ with a different wording to justify their view that raising the hands with takbīr invalidates the Prayer! That wording is false, as I have explained in _Silsilah al--Aḥādīth al--Ḍaʿīfah_ (6044).

[^i282]: Al--Ḥākim and al--Dhahabī declared it ṣaḥīḥ; it has already been given in full under the opening "Takbīr."

[^i283]: The first supplication is the fullest form of the duʿāʾ known as _kaffārah al--majlis_ (expiation of the gathering); "he who says it in a gathering of Remembrance (of Allāh), it will be like a seal to stamp it with, and he who says it in a gathering of vain talk, it will be an expiation for it" -- authentically related by al--Ḥākim and al--Ṭabarānī. The second supplication is, of course, from the Sunnah of sending peace and mercy on the Messenger. These two supplications are thus the best way of implementing the following Islamic guideline: "No people sit in a gathering in which they do not mention Allāh, nor send prayers on the Prophet, without it being a source of regret for them; if Allāh wishes, He will punish them, or if He wishes, he will forgive them" -- authentically related by al--Tirmidhī, al--Ḥākim and Aḥmad. See Shaykh al--Albānī's _Silsilah al--Aḥādīth al--Ṣaḥīḥah_ (74-81) for details.


